DRAWING BASICS
Notes & Exercise Samples
Which pencil should I use for line drawing?
The most popular ‘general use’ pencil is a Number 2 - in drawing pencils, its the HB. But the HB is a bit hard for drawing - its fine for very light sketching, such as when you are lightly sketching out a composition. When you want more variation or a firmer line, a B is much better. It is soft enough to give you a good line without pressing too hard, but hard enough to keep its point quite well. This might vary depending on your paper, and how much pressure you apply. For larger, expressive drawings, you can use a softer pencil, such as a 2B. The look of the pencil line will vary according to how hard you press, how sharp the pencil is (you should be using a sharp pencil for most drawing, unless you choose a blunter tip for some effect), and the texture of the paper you are using. Try experimenting with your softer pencils too - a 6B used for a large, vigorous, expressive drawing can look very strong and effective.
Which pencil should I use for shading?
Generally, the B is good for medium to light shading, and the 2 B for medium to dark, and you should be able to get a good range of tone (value) out of both, from quite light through to dark. Try them both, on a piece of scrap paper, to see which suits you best. Many artists like to use one of these mid-range pencils for pretty much everything, controlling lightness and darkness by shading more or less heavily. However, sometimes you might want a bit more intensity, or find that you can’t get your midrange pencil to go light enough or dark enough.
The 4B is good for darker shading. It is soft enough to give a good layer of graphite quickly, without blunting too fast. The 6B pencil is good for very dark areas, but is very soft and blunts quickly, so is difficult to use for detail. Because it blunts so quickly, It tends to look grainy, skimming over the surface of the paper. When burnishes - shaded very, very heavily
- graphite can look very shiny. Harder pencils contain more clay, so look a little less shiny than a very soft pencil.
The harder grades of pencil - from HB, through H, 2H to 5H - get progressively harder, easier to keep sharp, but also grayer and less shiny, because they have more clay in them. The harder pencils can dent the paper very easily. The HB and H can be used for fine, light, even shading.
Layering pencils - try shading an area with a hard pencil to flatten and smooth the grain before shading with a soft pencil. Shade over an area of soft pencil with a hard pencil, to smooth and even out the graphite, and create a more even surface appearance between the different types of pencil.
What do the H and B and numbers mean on a pencil?
Simply, the H means hard and B means black. H pencils, because they are hard, leave less graphite on the paper, so are lighter. B pencils are softer, so leave more graphite on the paper, and so are darker. F means Fine Point, and it is quite a hard pencil - easy to keep sharp, but generally a bit too hard for general drawing. The more Hs, the harder it is (so a 4 H is harder than a 2H) - HB is kind of in the middle, though for drawing, its still reasonably hard - and the more Bs it has, the softer it is - so the 7B is the softest. HB is equivalent to the standard American Number 2 pencil, B is Number 1.
Drawing Exercise: Circle Warm Ups
In order to loosen up and get ready to begin drawing some simple upper body stretches and exercises can be incredibly useful. Start by having everyone stand up and begin to roll their shoulders forwards and backwards. Then swing one arm in full circles, first forward and then backwards. Then swing the other arm the same way. Then take both arms and swing them around at the same time, first forward then backwards. When everyone has warmed up and is calmer ask everyone to spend a few minutes drawing large, brave and loose circles over and over again onto a large sheet of newsprint or sketch paper - this will get the mind and body relaxed and ready to begin the drawing exercises.
Drawing Exercise:
Get to Know Your Medium
The aim of this drawing exercise is to get to
know your medium - pencil, charcoal, pen etc
- with some purposeful scribbling. You can also learn something about the sort of marks you naturally make.
What You Need: Sketch paper and number 2 ‘B’ pencil. If you have other grades of pencil, repeat the exercise for each one. You can also try this exercise with charcoal, pen and other mediums.
What To Do: Use a page of your sketchbook and just have a scribble! BUT: remember, this is scribbling with a purpose. You have to pay attention to how heavy you press, and note what happens when you do something different.
Draw round loopy marks, ziz-zags, light lines, heavy dark lines. Try shading from light to dark and back again. Make some different marks and then drag your eraser across them. Which pencils erase well? Which smudge? Do they make an impression on the paper? How glossy is the graphite? It can be handy to make a note of which pencil makes which mark. Your page might look something like the example above.
Review:You might not think much of these marks, but now you are on your way to becoming an artist. Experimenting with materials is something all artists do - you’ll get to know how each medium behaves when it’s just on a piece of sketch paper, not halfway through a major piece - and happy accidents are often the inspiration for great works of art.
Consider the quality of the marks you have made. Are they vigorous or gentle? Have you wandered over the page, or ordered your patterns neatly? These qualities will be present in your drawing, and are worth thinking about.
Drawing Exercise - Still Life Study
Set up a simple still life in the studio or at home - placing all the students (or just yourself!) comfortably around it.
Taking a Line for a walk
Linear drawing can be achieved in many ways. One such way is by “Taking a line for a walk”
- initially associated with the artist Paul Klee (1879-1940). Study your subject matter and then pick a point from which to start your drawing and continue without taking your pencil off the paper until the drawing is complete.
Once you’re familiar with the process start to experiment with the amount of time you spend looking at the paper and the amount of time you spend looking at the subject. You should be aiming to spend less and less time looking at the paper and more time studying your subject matter.
Complete a series of studies giving yourself a gradually increasing amount of time - between 5 and 20 minutes - to execute each one.
Tonal Study
Using charcoal initially make 4 quick pieces created purely from the recording of the various tonal qualities within the still life. Each piece should take no more than a few minutes and you, the student should grow in clarity and confidence with each one.
After these preliminary pieces have been created now spend the remainder of the class making a a more considered study of the still life - one A3 drawing using line and one A3 drawing using tone. You may use whichever materials you prefer but the pieces should remain monochrome.