V)
l.J.J
CJ
l.J.J
Q
.>­
f--
l9
2::
1--/
2::
l9
1--/
V)
l.J.J
a
■-
V)
er
f-­
l.J.J
•
CJ
B	WILLEN NOLEN STRALS
II	A GUIDE TO LETTERFORMS	WITH A FOREWORD BY ELLEN LUPTON
Main Drag Installation, 2001 Margaret Kilgallen
Photo courtesy of Barry McGee
systems & type-ologies
Matchstick Alphabet (detail)
Alphabet, 2008 Lusine Sargsyan
Matchsticks radiate from letter skeletons formed by the bright red match tips, creating an almost three-dimensional effect. The unusual material unites (and potentially ignites) the eccentric characters of this flammable alphabet.
Systems
Any lettering or type is based on a system. Like a moral code for the alphabet, typographic systems are sets of visual rules and guidelines that govern the actions and decisions involved in creating letters. These implicit systems enable characters to work together, by regulating and defining their appearance—dictating their shapes and sizes, how they fit together, and their visual spirit, as well as all other underlying tenets of the letters. Lacking a strong code, a lettering treatment or typeface rarely leads a successful life.
Analyzing and defining a typographic system is a bit like playing Twenty Questions. Instead of “Animal, vegetable, or mineral?” one might ask, “Serif, sans serif, or mixed?” Are the characters all the same width, or do they vary from letter to letter? If there are serifs, what shapes do they take? Are the round characters flat sided or curved? Do the letters lock together, or are the spaces between them irregular?
The more questions one asks and answers, the better one can understand or create a typographic system. A well-established system constitutes the core of any typeface.
Either consciously or unconsciously, type designers build and follow rules that direct the myriad choices involved in creating a font. If a designer elects to draw letters with very round curves, this decision affects every curved character in the alphabet. If one or two letters do not reflect the system’s curves, they appear uncom- fortable and out of place within the font. Even relatively minor choices like the size of an i’s dot are telegraphed throughout the character set. Each decision that affects an alphabet’s visual code or the way that any letters relate to each other is part of the typographic system. By closely adhering to a system, a designer creates a typeface whose characters interact in a natural and consistent way.
6	lettering & type
Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of Typographic Style, version 2.5 (Point Roberts, WA: Hartley and Marks, 2002), 119.
Johanna Drucker, The Alphabetic Labyrinth: The Letters in History and Imagination (New York:
Thames and Hudson, 1999).
Opposite:
Lindisfarne Gospels, Saint Mark’s Gospel opening Illuminated manuscript, 710–721
Eadfrith, Bishop of Lindisfarne
Insular medieval artists in the British Isles departed from the Roman forms of the alphabet, creating inventive and highly decorative letterforms such as the “INI” that dominates this incipit page.
© The British Library Board.
All Rights Reserved. Cotton Nero D. IV, f.95. British Library, London.
The letters of the roman alphabet have adopted many forms and styles over several millennia. These are just some of the common variants of the letter A.
A Compressed History of the Roman Alphabet
As tools and symbols that exist at the nexus of art, commerce, and ideas, letters reflect the same cultural forces that inform all other aspects of society. Institutions and authorities from the Catholic Church to the Bauhaus to the Metropolitan Transportation Authority have used their political and cultural clout to influence, manipulate, and establish the alphabet’s prevailing forms. Letters are not created in a vacuum, and their appearance is as subject to the whims of power and taste as any other feature of society. The roman alphabet’s history cannot be separated from the history of Western civilization.
The shapes of the alphabet as we recognize them today became standardized and codified in the fifteenth century. Working during a period of commercial expansion and technological innovation, Renaissance typographers took handwriting and lettering styles and systematized them into movable type, a set of elements that could be rearranged and reproduced. Type had already been in use for centuries in China,1 but the compact and efficient character set of the roman alphabet made
it especially adaptable to printing. This powerful combination would spread the alphabet and literacy across the Western Hemisphere.
The roman alphabet’s phonetic nature makes it ideally suited to typog- raphy. Where Chinese languages employ a logographic alphabet comprising tens of thousands of distinct characters, the roman alphabet consists of twenty-six easy-to- learn letters and their variants. Each letter corresponds to specific sounds of speech.
Though not perfectly phonetic—some phonemes are conveyed through combinations like th, and many letters represent multiple sounds—the roman alphabet is a potent system for transcribing written language. The ancient Greeks, whose own writing system eventually cross-pollinated with the Romans’, referred to the alphabet as stoicheia (elements), in recognition of its powerful and fundamental nature.2
Greece adapted its written alphabet from Phoenicia’s, conforming Phoenician characters to the Greek language. This early Greek writing system filtered through the Etruscan civilization to the Romans, who refined and codified it to such a degree that the Roman alphabet influenced later evolutions of Greek. By the first century ad, the Roman uppercase was fully developed, and its forms are documented in the formal inscriptions carved on edifices throughout the Roman Empire. This ancient
a
systems & type-ologies	27
This faded, hand-lettered sign reveals the multiple
brushstrokes used to build each character. Although it lacks the defining characteristics
of type, careful lettering can mimic typography.
Writing, Lettering, or Type?
Writing, lettering, and type represent three distinct methods of creating letters. A written letter or word is created with very few strokes of the writing implement— think of cursive handwriting or a hastily scrawled note. Lettering builds the form of each character from multiple, often numerous, strokes or actions—a love note metic- ulously carved into a tree trunk or a hand-drawn letterform in graffiti, for instance. Type is a palette of ready-made shapes, enabling the reproduction of similar- or identical-looking letters through a single action—like summoning digital characters from a keyboard or pressing a rubber stamp on a sheet of paper.
Writing emphasizes quick communication and execution above appearance. Until the development of typography and, crucially, the spread of digital correspon- dence, handwriting’s relative speed and ease made it the most reasonable method for written communication. Imagine how long it would take to carefully draw each letter of a grocery list, and the advantages of a legible and efficient writing system become clear. This is not to suggest that writing is unconcerned with the aesthetics of letters. On the contrary, many handwriting methods and primers throughout the centuries have espoused the handwriting styles that their authors considered most beautiful or legible. The ability to write well, in terms of aesthetics as well as articulateness, was regarded as an integral part of literacy and education.
Lettered characters are constructed through multiple actions and may involve several tools or processes. A digitally drawn logo, a neon sign, and a chiseled inscription on a church doorway are all examples of lettering. Like writing, lettering is a one-of-a-kind creation, designed for a specific application. Even master letterers cannot duplicate exactly the same form from one instance to another—variations inevitably occur. Lettering differs from handwriting in that its main focus is usually on technique and visual appearance. While speed may be important, it is generally
less so than the end product. More than it does in writing and type, context influences the way lettering looks. The uniqueness of each lettering treatment allows its designer flexibility and creativity to respond to a given context in very specific ways. Letters can be compressed, warped, or interlocked to fit a particular space. Words can be built from the most appropriate medium or material, from pencil to stainless steel to chocolate syrup.
28	lettering & type
Sketchbook pages Calligraphy, 2006–2007 Letman (Job Wouters)
Some calligraphy blurs the line between handwriting and lettering. As letterforms grow more polished and embellished, they become more lettering-like. In some cases the artist’s intent may be the only distinction between an expertly written paragraph and a quickly lettered word.
No War
Monumental lettering, 2003 Verena Gerlach
Designed to protest the war in Iraq, this lettering installation uses a matrix of lit windows to form letters. The words become legible as building occupants leave for the evening and switch off (or leave on) the lights in each room.
systems & type-ologies	29
writing
lettering
type
Quick cursive and print hands are two common forms of writing. As characters become more painstakingly executed or constructed, they become lettering. Type occasionally mimics writing or lettering styles with its ready-made palette of shapes.
Los Feliz
Typeface, 2002 Christian Schwartz with Zuzana Licko and Rudy VanderLans, Emigre.
Original sign lettering by Cosmo Avila
Los Feliz is based on hand- lettered signs on an auto parts store in Los Angeles. The final typeface retains many of the idiosyncrasies of the original lettering, but standardizes them into a more regular system.
Photos by Matthew Tragesser.
Lettered or written characters that can be reproduced and rearranged become type. Type unites the detail and formality of lettering with the speed and ease of handwriting. The ability to create and reproduce preexisting characters through a single action differentiates type from writing and lettering. Reproduction methods have varied and evolved over the centuries. Metal and wood typefaces, rub-down transfer letters, typewriters, rubber stamps, stencils, photo lettering, and digital fonts are all examples of type. Type’s strength and beauty lie in its ability to look the same in any context. One can type an A thousands of times and achieve a consistent result, yet writing or lettering the same character will produce variations. Type also constitutes a system of powerful relationships, which transform a palette of shapes into a true kit of parts capable of endless recombinations. Like any set of tools, type has power that is measured not just by individual elements but also by how the parts work together. Unlike lettered and written characters, each typographic glyph must be ready to redeploy into a new word formation at any time.
Thanks to digital technologies, typography has usurped many of writing’s long-held roles. It is much faster and more practical to write letters, take notes, or chart finances by typing on a computer than by handwriting these communications. Likewise, graphic designers have replaced lettering artists with digital fonts that can quickly reproduce effects similar, though not usually equal, to custom lettering. The loss of personality and individuality found in handwriting and lettering is an unfortunate side effect of the proliferation of type. Nonetheless, an exponentially growing library of new and more sophisticated typefaces keeps increasing the range of type’s voice.
	
OOIOO
Screen-printed poster, 2007
Animal Collective
Photocopied flyer, 2004
Sightings
Photocopied flyer, 2005
Wzt Hearts
Color photocopied flyer, 2007
Interview: Shaun Flynn
The designs of musician and artist Shaun Flynn stand out on bulletin boards and record store shelves in his native Baltimore and around the country. Flynn’s posters frequently incorporate elaborate or hidden lettering, in some cases abandoning any imagery in favor of a text-only solution.
You have a fine arts background. How did you get into lettering, which is often considered the realm of graphic design? I first began making posters out of necessity, for my bands in Baltimore. You’ve got a show, you need to promote it, and you want to make the poster look nice. Eventually other people began asking me to do flyers. I don’t think I would have started making posters, especially for other people, without that aspect of self-promotion of the music I was playing.
What, if any, distinction do you see between making a text-based poster and creating a drawing or art installation? Both my posters and my artwork usually start with a simple material base and have a lo-fi, handmade process. With posters you have a single pen or a box of markers. I like taking a simple object or set of materials and turning it into something visually complex. I really appreciate bold simplicity, but I’m not a great “simple” designer. My work often winds up being ornate and taking a long time. It isn’t neces- sarily ornate for its own sake but about whether or not I think it’s worth putting the time into.
Why do you take a primarily hand-drawn approach to your flyers and posters? I never had a computer or took any computer courses in college. I really eschewed the graphic arts industry when I was in school. It wasn’t something I considered having to use because, of course, I was going to be a “famous artist in New York.” It became quickly apparent after I started making posters that the hand-drawn aspect was a big part of my interest. Handmade stuff is more interesting to me; your style emerges more quickly.
Your work often combines lettering and image into a single composition. Why do you approach posters in this unified way? I like integrating lettering into the imagery of the poster so that it really feels like one
whole thing, not just some drawing from a sketchbook with words across the bottom. It makes an event seem more important when there’s an image that can’t be detached from the show. Sometimes I’ll focus my energy on the information, the letters rather than the image—making the letters into the image themselves. It’s pretty infinite what you can do to letters, and it’s amazing what your brain will read.
Anything can be very simply turned into some kind of letterform. There’s really no reason or need to have anything else on a poster other than cool letters. If the poster is striking enough, whatever the degree of legibility, people will spend a little more time with it.
Vendetta
Typeface, 1999
John Downer, Emigre
Vendetta employs an unusual construction that is both calli graphic and geometric. The letters’ abundant facets and angular strokes become apparent when shown at display sizes.
Versa
Drawings and typeface, 1993–2004 Peter Verheul, OurType
Versa’s organic forms were originally conceived as a display alphabet, following in the footsteps of faces like Albertus and Optima. As Verheul refined the typeface, its original eccentricities became less pronounced, and the final roman exhibits the evenness and openness of text type.
creating letters	57
banner
display
subhead
text
plus
reverse
Vincent
Type family, 1999 Matthew Carter
Commissioned as a type family for Newsweek magazine, Vincent’s six fonts are each designed for specific applica- tions. The display faces have narrower widths and spacing, while two text weights provide slight variations in overall color. The heavier Reverse
is used for setting white text knocked out of a dark background.
Creating Text Letters and Book Type
Reading a good book typeface is like wearing a well-broken-in shoe. The eye slips comfortably into the letters, which become an extension of the text itself. To maintain this comfortable and transparent quality, the shapes of book letters cannot stray too far from the conventions of legibility. Even the most contemporary and imaginative text type is part of a long visual lineage. Any letter whose form departs too far from the currently accepted shapes of the roman alphabet will be more difficult to read, especially at small sizes and for large bodies of text. Nonetheless, designers have managed to interpret book writing, lettering, and typography in expansive ways.
Creating text type is an arcane craft that is fundamentally bound to percep- tions of legibility and readability. For most of alphabetic history, all letters were created at actual size. Contemporary designers enjoy the relatively recent luxury of working in large dimensions and scaling their letters at will. Although working at actual size leaves less room both for error and for delicate detailing, it provides a direct connection to the letters’ end use. Like telecommuting to a job, working large offers countless benefits, but it can also leave a designer isolated and out of touch. For type designers working digitally, or otherwise scaling lettering or handwriting, the context of end use is crucial—they must constantly keep in mind how the characters will appear in their intended environment. Letters that look great six inches high may look terrible when used at book sizes.
Since all metal type is created at actual size, designers of metal type must create separate matrices for each point size of a typeface. Although this is a much more arduous task than repurposing a single font for many sizes, it allows a type designer to optimize each letter for its end use. As the font sizes grow smaller, a type designer will subtly increase the x-height, letterspacing, and width while exaggerating small details like serifs and aperture size. Contrast generally decreases at small sizes, to maintain the robustness of thin strokes. Even though these adjustments may slightly alter the character of the letterforms, they make letters more legible and readable at small sizes.
Some contemporary designers and digital type foundries have revived the practice of releasing typefaces with multiple fonts for specific sizes, acknowledging that type designed for use at twelve point may not work as well at six point.
62	lettering & type
Above:
Young Leader Live Sessions Lettering, 2004 Alex Trochut
Although sinuous and decorative in appearance, the characters in this lettering treatment are assembled from a reduced set of elements.
Below:
Scandinavian Sparks
Typeface, 2004 Hjärta Smärta
Created for an exhibition of Swedish art and design, the characters of Scandinavian Sparks are built from symbols and motifs found in traditional Swedish handicrafts.
  					
Whimcircle Alphabet, 2004 Tore Terrasi
;;;,	¥
11	I
�	I
I 	I
I
102
lettering & type
The lowercase o maintains more circular proportions in some typefaces, especially in geometric sans serifs and modern faces.
To avoid appearing small next to square and diagonal characters, the round lowercase letters all have overshoots and slightly broader widths.
Less common is a boxy and flat-sided o, which can reduce or even eliminate the need for overshoots.
Curved strokes thin at the top and bottom and thicken at the sides.
The stroke emphasis of the o also determines the typeface’s axis. Franklin Gothic has
a vertical axis. Humanist typefaces typically have oblique stress, and the axis may vary from character to character.
The overhang of the c does not extend beyond the lower stroke.
A c with an aperture that is too large may exhibit uneven color; however, apertures that are too small reduce legibility.
The shape of the counter and outside curves of the o establish the rounded forms that are carried throughout the typeface’s system.
The c is narrower than the o to compensate for its added negative space.
 
The e’s crossbar is above the centerline of the letter.
Significant thinning of both round and horizontal strokes keeps the e from filling in and appearing too dark.
Significant thinning and tapering of the horizontals prevent the two-story a from appearing too dark and congested.
The top of the a is slightly narrower than its bowl, to keep the letter from seeming top-heavy and unbalanced.
In some fonts, the
a incorporates a short tail or a transitive serif that references the exit mark of the pen.
In old style and transitional fonts, the eye of the e is typically asymmetrical and sometimes enclosed with a diagonal crossbar.
Like many twentieth-century sans serifs, Franklin Gothic’s two-story a possesses a large bowl and narrow aperture. The a in humanist fonts typically has a much shorter bowl.
The single-story version of the a, frequently found in italics and geometric sans serifs, is similar in construction to the q.
making letters work
103
Because of their angled strokes and joins, diagonal characters typically display increased stroke contrast and tapering.
The v’s left diagonal is thicker than its right. This difference in stroke weight is more pronounced in faces with high contrast.
The strokes of many vs taper as they approach the join. Ink traps exist at the joins in some bolder typefaces.
The w is narrower than the m and is frequently asymmetrical.
The angles of the w’s two middle strokes differ from those of the outer strokes, to keep the character from becoming too wide.
Thinning and tapering, especially noticeable on the middle strokes, maintain the w’s even color.
On some bold fonts, ink traps may be added to relieve heaviness at the joins.
The lowercase x gives the illusion of being a symmetrical character.
The strokes of the y
taper into the join.
The top half of the x is slightly shorter and narrower than the bottom half, to avoid top-heaviness.
The slightly thicker left diagonal reflects the font’s stroke emphasis.
The y’s join is above the baseline.
Subtle, or occasionally prominent, offsets and stroke tapering maintain the x’s optical balance.
Stroke weight and emphasis follow the axis and pattern of the typeface’s system.
The descender of the y typically flares or ends in a terminal.
Empire State Building
Typeface, 2007
Designed with Paul Barnes
Below:
Houston
Newspaper typeface, 2003
Above and right:
Stag and Stag Bold Dot Magazine display typefaces, 2005–2008
Right: Farnham Typeface, 2004
Above:
Amplitude
Typeface, 2001, 2003
Left:
Stag Sans
Magazine display typeface, 2007
Above:
Publico
Newspaper typeface, 2007 Initial version designed with Paul Barnes
Interview: Christian Schwartz
American type designer Christian Schwartz created and published his first digital font when he was fourteen years old. Since then he has designed well-known retail type families including Neutraface, Farnham, and Amplitude, along with custom typefaces for publications such as Esquire, the Guardian, and the Houston Chronicle.
How do you, as a contemporary type designer, work within the constraints and historical context of book/text type design? I got into type design because I love to read—magazines and newspapers as well as books. This probably explains why my taste in type skews a little conservative and explains my love of historical typefaces. Although these three kinds of media are all printed on paper, the text type for each has pretty
different needs. Newspapers are usually printed in narrow columns with very little leading, while book type is typically in wide columns with generous leading, on much nicer paper, and so on. I’ve enjoyed working within and pushing against these constraints, and there’s much more to explore.
What is the most crucial step in the development of a typeface? For me, deciding on or understanding a typeface’s purpose is the most crucial step. The typefaces for the Empire State Building referenced the building’s existing lettering but also had to be legible for signage, while taking into account materials and manufacturing processes. I like working with these kinds of constraints, because they usually force me to be clever and use some lateral thinking. For self-initiated projects like Amplitude and Farnham, I’ve come up with strict guidelines for myself, because having a problem to solve keeps me focused. Out in the wild, designers will use a typeface in unexpected ways, but it must do one thing really well before it can do other random things well.
How does your type design process start? Before I start drawing something I spend a lot of time ruminating on ideas and discussing things with my frequent collaborator, Paul Barnes. I also like to look at historical examples of how problems have been solved before—I may not follow what my predecessors did, but then at least I know what I’m disagreeing with and why.
In your opinion, what makes a good typeface? A good typeface is well crafted and useful, and sets up into attractive-looking words. It also holds together as a complete system, where individual letters don’t distract the reader. A good typeface doesn’t make you wonder what you might do with it, or why it exists.
What is the most important advice you received when you first began designing type? Tobias Frere-Jones told me to always space as I draw, which is obvious once you know it, but was a revelation at the time. Matthew Carter told me that I didn’t need to learn calligraphy to be a good type designer, unless I wanted to. That opened up my eyes to the fact that there are many different, legitimate ways to create good typefaces.