Graphic Design Disciplines 
When the term ‘Graphic Designer’ is initially mentioned generally people will automatically refer to it being a role that involves the production of printed materials (brochures or leaflets etc) or online materials (websites or banners etc). But the scope of ‘what a Graphic Designer can do?’ is ever expanding.
The term Graphic Design now encompasses:
Typography;
Editorial, layout, book arts and mass publishing;
Information visualisation;
Illustration;
Photography;
Packaging;
Online user interface (UI) and user experience (UX); and/or
Motion graphics.
And so much more in between!
SO, as a Graphic Designer are you automatically meant to know how to do all of these different types of design work? Luckily, the short answer is no!
Generally in todays working environment a Graphic Designer should have the core abilities to work across print and online, being able to design the within the correct format and structure for both. The broad depth of abilities a  Graphic Designer will need to have will depend on the type of job role you take.
A Freelance Designer can specialise in a certain area if they wish. Taking clients based on your skillset is key to creating an expandable and workable working relationship.
An in-house designer will usually specialise based on their skillset, but this may depend on the business you are employed within. A smaller multi disciplinary company may tend to require a broader knowledge base in order to work across all aspects of design. Whereas a larger company employing a greater number of designers may have the scope to be able to focus a job role within a certain discipline.
The Core
As a Graphic Designer there are certain elements and principles you will need to understand and be able to apply effectively. 
The seven primary elements of graphic design are
Line 
Shape
Form 
Colour 
Texture 
Space 
Value

Design elements are tangible characteristics and physical features. Each element has unique and specific attributes, which, when used effectively together, raise the overall quality of the design. They are different from the principles of design, which are far more subjective.
The seven fundamental principles of design are: 
Balance 
Contrast 
Alignment 
Hierarchy 
Composition
Repetition
Proximity

These basic principles apply universally to many disciplines of art and design. They are the standards by which art and design works are judged. Still, there are many applications of the principles that are specific to graphic design. 
The principles are intangible. As we visually examine a piece of design we subconsciously absorb and evaluate all of the principles applied. As a graphic designer, it is important to understand how to apply the principles of design and how they impact on the intended audience.
Typography
As a Graphic Designer, being able to utilise the principles by applying the elements effectively is paramount to creating a harmonious and, ultimately, a well executed design. 
Being able to lay out type (‘type set’) and manipulate and design typographic elements is an essential part of Graphic Design today. Understanding how the typographic elements you include in your design can add impact and increase engagement is crucial.
Jan Tschichold
Tschichold claimed that he was one of the most powerful influences on 20th century
typography. There are few who would attempt to deny that statement. The son of a sign
painter and trained in calligraphy, Tschichold began working with typography at a very
early age. Raised in Germany, he worked closely with Paul Renner (who designed Futura)
and fled to Switzerland during the rise of the Nazi party. His emphasis on new typography
and sans-serif typefaces was deemed a threat to the cultural heritage of Germany, which
traditionally used Blackletter Typography and the Nazis seized much of his work before he
was able to flee the country.
When Tschichold wrote Die Neue Typographie he set forth rules for standardization of
practices relating to modern type usage. He condemned all typefaces except for
sans-serif types, advocated standardized sizes of paper and set forth guidelines for
establishing a typographic hierarchy when using type in design. While the text still has
many relative uses today, Tschichold eventually returned to a classicist theory in which
centered designs and roman typefaces were favored for blocks of copy.
Paul Rand
Paul Rand is one of the most famous and recognized American designers
of the 20th Century. His ideas, philosophies and approach continue to be a large part of
the fundamentals of design taught in education programs across the world.
His early career was spent working for Apparel Arts & Esquire magazines and then joining
the Weintraub agency. He was so successful that after a few years he demanded twice
the pay for half the time, and got it. His relentless passion for corporate identity helped
shape the American business landscape in the 1960s. The height of corporate identity
design owed much to the unwavering pursuit of Paul Rand to make advertising more than
just billboards. He worked in the field until the day that he died, at the age of 82.
Saul Bass
Saul Bass was an American designer whose 40+ year career spanned everything from
print and identity development to movie title credits. He worked with major corporations
to establish logos and branding guidelines, including AT&T, United Way and Continental
Airlines. He designed titles for over 30 films and he won an academy award for his short
film Why Man Creates. Also proficient in typography his "cut-paper" style is one of the
most recognized styles of design from the 1950s and 60s.
He revolutionized the way that people viewed movie titles by using the time to not just
display the information but give a short visual metaphor or story that intrigued the viewer.
Often times it was a synopsis or reference to the movie itself. His list of title credits include
famous films such as West Side Story, Psycho, Goodfellas, Big, North by Northwest and
Spartacus. He created four titles for Martin Scorsese, the last of which was for Casino.


Herb Lubalin
Most people recognize the name Herb Lubalin in association with the typeface Avant
Garde. And he was the typographer and designer behind its creation, after the success of
Avant Garde Magazine and its typographic logo. But, his career spanned a much wider
scope than that. One of the people behind the culture-shocking magazines Avant-Garde,
Eros and Fact, he was a constant boundary breaker on both a visual and social level. Part
of the founding team of the International Typeface Corporation (ITC) and the principal of
Herb Lubalin, Inc it was hard to escape the reach of Herb during the 1960s and 70s.
His constant search for something new and a passion for inventiveness made him one of
the most successful art directors of the 20th century. He had offices internationally in
Paris and London and partnered with many talented individuals over the years including
Aaron Burns, Tom Carnase, Ernie Smith and Ralph Ginzburg. A graduate of the Cooper
Union in New York he spent time as a visiting professor there as well as designed a logo
for them. Constantly working and achieving much success throughout his career, at the
age of 59 he proclaimed "I have just completed my internship.”