In this article, you will continue familiarising yourself with the design process by exploring how to take your initial ideas and create mockups/prototypes of your design using CAD software, which you were introduced to in Lesson 10. You will also look at how to evaluate your final design and make the necessary adjustments to satisfy your client brief or design goal.
Creating CAD designs
As you’re already aware, computer-aided design (CAD) is the process of creating digital 2D or 3D versions of your design using software like Adobe Illustrator, AutoCAD, Autodesk Revit, Canva, etc. CAD software allows designers to add effects, typography, colour etc. to a design resulting in digital visualisations that represent the final product. 
Fig 1. Unsplash (n.d.) CAD designs
Most (if not all) employers expect graphic designers to have experience creating CAD designs. This makes it a vital skill for your professional arsenal. These design skills include:
Understanding the difference between various CAD applications
Setting up the relevant software
Navigating the user interface (e.g. panels, design space, layout tabs, status bar, properties, etc.)
Inputting commands and understanding different selections
Using basic drawing tools (e.g. paintbrush, pencil, curvature, etc.)
Making appropriate editing choices and adjusting the scale
Saving the designs in suitable formats 
Fig 2. Unsplash (n.d.) Applying CAD software tools
CAD software is a tool that allows designers to add effects, typography, colour, etc. to a design that results in a digital version of the final product, often called a mockup or prototype. A mockup is a static rendering of a design, such as a company logo or a billboard advertisement. A prototype is a model of a design product that allows testing of its functionality in a website or online game for example.  
Before you create a digital version of your design using CAD, ensure that your sketched ideas satisfy the relevant criteria and that the elements and principles applied to your design concept have been worked out and finalised. At this stage of the design process there is still room for minor adjustments to your CAD design, but they should be minimal.
Fig 3. Unsplash (n.d.) CAD application features
Once you are ready to create your CAD designs, it is essential to decide whether you will use existing templates and modify them to suit your needs or if you will create an original design. There are also other online design resources that you can use like illustrations, photos, backgrounds, diagrams, fonts, or any other images you find relevant. But, when using any available design resources, you must ensure that you abide by creative licensing and copyright laws.
Reviewing the design
Once you have created your CAD design, it is important to assess its effectiveness against the initial brief.  During the iterative development stage you should have continually questioned your design ideas, but ask yourself the following questions again to assess the success of your design: 
What is the purpose of the design?
What were the client's requirements for this design?
Does the design fulfil every requirement?
Does the design achieve the goal you intended?
Does the design effectively communicate the main message?
Do all the elements and principles of design form a coherent, professional, and aesthetically pleasing composition?
Fig 4. Pixabay (n.d.) Example of guiding questions to assess design
These are just some questions that can guide further refinement of your concept before presenting it to the client and/or other stakeholders. Depending on the scope and nature of the project, your questions should relate to specific aspects of the design and how it satisfies the initial brief.
Testing the design
The objective of the testing stage is to find out whether or not the design satisfies the client's requirements and to make any final amendments. The main aim of the design review stage is not to add anything new, but to obtain constructive feedback on your design. This is typically done by presenting a design to relevant stakeholders, like a client or someone representing a potential user. 
Getting feedback on your work can be a nerve-wracking experience for any designer but it is a vital step to help you refine your concept and deliver an exceptional product. It is worth noting that upon entering the testing stage, is it advisable for a designer to try not to be overly set on your concept. Try to leave some room to be flexible since the feedback you receive may involve going back to tweak a few things. Just remember that this is a normal part of any designer’s journey and shouldn’t cause you to doubt your ability as a designer. 
Since feedback can have a significant impact on the final design, you must get meaningful and specific criticism from your client or user to help you identify areas for improvement. For example, vague comments like “It looks fine” will not help you assess how well the design meets the client’s expectations, nor will it help you make final adjustments. In some cases, the client may be too shy or embarrassed to give their honest opinion or they could use vague phrases to appear agreeable. You don’t want to leave the client unhappy with the final design while you are at a loss on how to proceed. 
Fig 5. Unsplash (n.d.) Feedback session with client
To better support the feedback you are getting, you need to:
Guide the client’s feedback. For example, you can ask them specific questions that prompt detailed answers or help identify the strengths and weaknesses of your design. You can also create a checklist or use a survey with questions that require feedback on particular aspects of the design. 
Use effective feedback tools. Together with questionnaires or feedback forms, you can also make use of online tools that will help your client to give feedback quickly and easily, like FigJam, Cage, Marker.io, or Bounce. This approach works well if you are not presenting a design in person or sharing it with multiple stakeholders.
Give enough time for feedback. This simple consideration is surprisingly helpful. Giving clients a few days or a week to give you feedback will allow them to reflect on their initial reactions and to ponder later reactions. This allows them to really think about their feedback with regard to each element of the design. 
Fig 6. Example of a survey to gain feedback (excerpt)
Finalising the design 
After you obtain feedback, it is time to make the necessary modifications related to the areas of improvement identified by the client. The adjustments might range from minor tweaks (e.g. adjusting the brightness of the text colour or increasing the font size by one or two sizes) to more extensive changes (e.g. replacing the imagery and changing the typeface to provoke a different mood/emotion). Regardless of the scope, ensure you are clear on the exact details of the adjustments you need to make to satisfy your client. 
For example, if the client was unsatisfied with the typeface you used, explore the issue further by asking them specific questions to help you generate a solution. Questions might include:
What aspect of the font is not to your liking?
Does the font grab your attention or do you feel it is lacking in visual impact?
Would you prefer a more modern font style (e.g. Sans Serif)?
Would you prefer a more traditional font style (e.g. Serif)?
Is your concern related to the mood or feelings the font provokes?
Is your concern related to the technical aspects of the font (e.g. size, shape, colour, placement, etc.)? 
Once adjustments have been made to your design, you will present it to your client again for as many times as it takes until they approve it. 
Fig 7. Unsplash (n.d.) A happy client is good for business
When your design finally gets the green light, it is ready for production. It is important at this stage that you refrain from making any more edits, even if the perfectionist in you is itching to make additional tweaks. Depending on the company you work for or your own business, you may be the person who oversees the design production in its various forms (e.g. printed material or online). 
Fig 8. Final design production
Or if not, perhaps you will simply export your design in the appropriate file format for your client’s in-house design team to access and use accordingly. Usually, these ready-to-use design file formats will be exported and shared as JPGs, PNGs, or PDFs. 
 