Jan Tschichold (1902–1974) 
Jan Tschichold is best known for his work in the field of typography and his contributions to the modernist movement in graphic design. He was a highly influential typographer, book designer, and graphic designer of the 20th century. Born in Leipzig, Germany, he began working with typography at a very early age, initially training as a calligrapher. Tschichold also worked closely with Paul Renner (who designed Futura) during his career. 
Fig 1. Sabon font, an old-style serif typeface designed by Jan Tschichold in 1964–1967.
His emphasis on new typography and sans-serif typefaces was deemed a threat to the cultural heritage of Germany, which traditionally used Blackletter Typography. He fled to Switzerland during the rise of the Nazi party, but not before the Nazis seized much of his work.
In the 1920s, Tschichold was associated with the Bauhaus School of Design, where he was exposed to and influenced by the principles of modernist design. He became an advocate for the use of asymmetrical typography, geometric shapes, and sans-serif typefaces. Tschichold wrote a book "Die Neue Typographie" (The New Typography) which was published in 1928 and played a significant role in promoting modernist design principles. In this, he set forth rules for standardisation of practices relating to modern type usage.
Later in his career, Tschichold moved away from his earlier modernist stance and embraced a more classical and traditional approach to typography. This shift in his design philosophy was influenced by his experiences and changes in the design landscape.
Fig 2. Penguin Books design, typography by Tschichold (1965). 
Paul Rand (1914-1996)
Born Peretz Rosenbaum in Brooklyn, New York, Paul Rand was one of the most famous and recognised American graphic designers of the 20th century. He is best known for his corporate logo designs and his contributions to the development of modern graphic design. His ideas, philosophies and approach continue to be a large part of the fundamentals of design taught in education programs across the world. Rand studied at the Pratt Institute and the Art Students League.
László Moholy-Nagy [director of the Bauhaus in 1923] described Rand as follows: "He is a painter, lecturer, industrial designer, [and] advertising artist who draws his knowledge and creativeness from the resources of this country. He is an idealist and a realist, using the language of the poet and business man. He thinks in terms of need and function. He is able to analyze his problems but his fantasy is boundless." 
His early career was spent working for Apparel Arts & Esquire magazines and then joining the Weintraub agency. He was so successful that after a few years he demanded twice the pay for half the time, and got it. His relentless passion for corporate identity helped shape the American business landscape in the 1960s. The height of corporate identity design owed much to the unwavering pursuit of Paul Rand to make advertising more than just billboards. He worked in the field until the day that he died, at the age of 82.
Aside from his work in logo design, Rand was a prolific book cover designer and created influential corporate identity programs. He believed that design should be both functional and visually pleasing, and he advocated for the integration of design into the overall business strategy.
Fig 3. IBM and abc logos design by Rand
Some of Paul Rand's most iconic and enduring logo designs include those for companies such as IBM, ABC, UPS, and NeXT. His designs were characterised by simplicity, clever use of negative space, and a modernist approach. Rand's work often combined bold, geometric shapes with a keen sense of visual wit. His legacy extends beyond his individual designs, since he played a crucial role in elevating the status of graphic design as a profession and promoting the idea that design should be an integral part of business and culture. 
Fig 4. IBM logo designed by Rand
Saul Bass (1920-1996)
Saul Bass was an American graphic designer and filmmaker, whose career spanned over 40 years. He is best known for his iconic and influential work in the field of film title sequences and movie poster design. Born in New York City, he started his career in the 1940s as a graphic designer, working with major corporations to establish logos and branding guidelines, including AT&T, United Way and Continental Airlines. 
Bass later moved onto film and designed titles for over 30 films. He revolutionised the art of film title design by introducing a minimalist and highly graphic approach, even winning an academy award for his short film Why Man Creates (1968). Also proficient in typography his "cut-paper" style is one of the most recognized styles of design from the 1950s and 60s. Saul Bass revolutionised the way that people viewed movie titles by using the time to not just display the information but give a short visual metaphor or story that intrigued the viewer. Oftentimes it was a synopsis or reference to the movie itself. His list of title credits include infamous films such as North by Northwest (1959),  Spartacus (1960), West Side Story (1961), Alfred Hitchcock’s Psycho (1960), Big (1988), and Goodfellas (1990). He also created the title for Otto Preminger’s Anatomy of a Murder (1959) and four titles for Martin Scorsese, the last of which was for Casino (1995).
Fig 5. Saul Bass film title designs
Saul Bass's contributions to graphic design and film earned him widespread recognition and numerous awards. His impact on the design world, particularly in the realms of film and corporate branding, has left a lasting legacy. The Saul Bass logo for major companies and his innovative approach to film titles continue to be celebrated and studied in the fields of graphic design and cinema.
Herb Lubalin (1918-1981)
Herb Lubalin was an influential American graphic designer and typographer, known for his innovative and expressive approach. In the mid-20th century he made significant contributions to the field of typography and graphic acting as a pioneer in the use of expressive and experimental typography. 
Fig 6. Herb Lubalin type designs
Lubalin's work was diverse, ranging from editorial design to corporate branding. His designs were known for their conceptual clarity, creativity, and often incorporated a sense of humour. He worked on a wide range of projects, from magazine layouts to logos, leaving a lasting impact on the design community. Many, though, consider him a master of one area in particular: letterforms. Herb Lubalin had a keen understanding of how typography could convey meaning and emotion and created the widely popular typeface ITC Avant Garde. 
Some of his other notable works include the design of Avant Garde magazine and he also co-founded the International Typeface Corporation (ITC) in 1970. But, his career spanned a much wider scope than that. As one of the people behind the culture-shocking magazines Avant-Garde, Eros and Fact, he was a constant boundary breaker on both a visual and social level.
Fig 7. Herb Lubalin type designs
Milton Glaser (1929-2020)
Milton Glaser was a renowned American graphic designer, best known for his iconic and influential contributions to the field. Born in New York City, Glaser had a prolific career that spanned several decades, during which he left a lasting impact on graphic design, illustration, and visual communication. His work has taken the form of many vessels, including Pushpin Studios, New York Magazine, and Milton Glaser, Inc. He was a founding member of all three organisations with each significantly contributing to the development of the design and advertising professions. Still in operation, all three continue to create new material on a regular basis.
Milton Glaser is perhaps most famous for creating the "I ♥ NY" logo in 1977. This logo, with its simple and memorable design featuring a heart replacing the word "love," has become one of the most recognizable symbols in the world. It was created as part of a campaign to promote tourism in New York City.
Fig 8. Milton Glaser’s iconic “I [heart] NY” design
Another notable and iconic piece of his portfolio work is Glaser's poster of Bob Dylan, featuring a psychedelic, multicoloured silhouette of Dylan's face with vibrant, swirling hair. This poster captures the spirit of the 1960s and has become an emblematic representation of the era.
Milton Glaser's impact on graphic design is immeasurable, and his work continues to inspire and influence designers worldwide. He received numerous awards and honours throughout his career, including the National Medal of Arts in 2009. Glaser passed away in 2020, leaving behind a legacy of creativity and innovation in the world of design.
Massimo Vignelli (1931-2014)
Born in Milan in 1931, Italian designer Massimo Vignelli studied art and architecture before coming to America in 1957. Vignelli is known for his significant contributions to various design disciplines including graphic design, advertising, packaging, industrial design, interior design, and typography. An avid fan of modernism, his work was always very clear and concise with no clutter or unnecessary material.
His first major foray into the field of identity and branding was through Unimark International, which quickly became one of the largest design studios in the world. He has designed identities for international corporations including American Airlines (which is the only airline to have not changed their identity in the past 50 years), Bloomingdales and Knoll. He favours a clarity in design and is a huge fan of using Helvetica, which can be seen in much of his work.
Fig 9. Massimo Vignelli’s New York subway map design
Vignelli is renowned for designing the New York City subway map in 1972. Although controversial at the time due to its abstract and simplified representation of the subway system, the map is considered a classic of modernist design. Vignelli was just as involved in typeface design and, along with his wife, created the typeface called Vignelli Hand. He also used typefaces like Helvetica in many of his designs, contributing to the popularisation of this typeface.
Erik Spiekermann (1947-  )
Erik Spiekermann was born in Germany and studied History of Art and English in Berlin. He is an author, an information architect, type designer and author of books and articles on type and typography. Spiekermann has designed numerous typefaces, and his work often reflects a modern, clean, and functional aesthetic. One of his well-known typefaces is FF Meta, created in collaboration with fellow designer Christian Schwartz. Other typefaces that he designed include ITC Officina, FF Info, FF Unit, LoType, Berliner Grotesk and many corporate typefaces.
Fig 10. Erik Spiekermann type design
Spiekermann was founder (1979) of MetaDesign, Germany’s largest design firm with offices in Berlin, London and San Francisco. He is responsible for corporate design programs for Audi, Skoda, Volkswagen, Lexus, Heidelberg Printing, Bosch and way-finding projects like Berlin Transit, Düsseldorf Airport and many others. In 1988 he started FontShop, a company for production and distribution of electronic fonts.
Pieter Saville (1955- )
Peter Saville is a highly influential British graphic designer and art director known for his innovative and distinctive work, particularly in the realm of album cover design. Saville has played a significant role in shaping the visual identity of the music industry, most notably during the post-punk and New Wave movements. 
Peter Saville was a designer whose career spanned several decades. His early work, in the late 1970s and early 80s, included album covers for several bands on the Factory Records label but the covers that achieved the highest level of fame were for New Order and Joy Division who brought the record label into the spotlight.  Between the years of 1979 and 2005 Saville designed the covers for many albums for both of these bands.
Fig 11. Peter Saville designs
He was notably influenced by the book “Pioneers of Modern Typography” by Herbert Spencer. The book explained how modern typography had actually emerged from the ideas of 20th century painting, poetry and architecture, and not from the development of the printing industry. He was particularly influenced by the work of Jan Tschichold and his disciplined, yet subtle approach to typography. After Factory Records he worked for DinDisc, spent three years as a partner at Pentagram, was an art director at Frankfurt Balkind and eventually started his own studio. Throughout his career he has worked in the music industry creating album covers for bands including Duran Duran, Wham! and Roxy Music.
Saville collaborated with various artists, musicians, and fashion designers, contributing to a diverse range of projects. His work often blends modernist design principles with a postmodern sensibility and he is often praised for its intellectual depth, cultural references, and ability to capture the essence of the music or brand it represents.
Louise Fili (1951- )
Louise Fili is an American graphic designer and type designer known for her elegant and distinctive work in branding, logo design, and book design. Born in New Jersey, USA to Italian immigrants, Fili has always been inspired by everything Italian. She had an exceptional career spanning several decades and is particularly renowned for her expertise in restaurant and food packaging design.
Fig 12. Some of Fili’s packaging designs
Fili worked in the book publishing business for 11 years and now runs her own design studio where she specialises in restaurant identity, food packaging and book jacket design. Her interest in food and Italian culture began when she visited Italy as a 16 year old. Fili’s affection for typography also started when she was very young and she would often spend the night-time hours hiding in the dark so she could carve lettering into the wall over her bed.
Louise Fili was a designer for Herb Lubalin for 3 years before becoming an art director for Pantheon Books. While she was there she designed over 2000 book covers and jackets. She has taught and lectured on graphic design at various institutions and she has also authored and co-authored several books on design, including "Italianissimo" and "Scripts: Elegant Lettering from Design's Golden Age."