Graphic Design
International Typographic Style/Swiss Style
In the Second World War, artists and graphic designers were fleeing their war-torn countries to neutral Switzerland.
German speaking Basle and Zurich were appealing to these people, so many reputable & talented designers settled in these cities, working & furthering their studies.
Graphic design in Switzerland had made a name for itself already in the De Stijl, Constructivism and the Bauhaus movements.
The Swiss Style (later to be called the International Typographic Style) was hugely predominant from approximately 1950-1970 following the influences of Bauhaus designers.
The Swiss Style included works of book,
poster, trademarks and advertising. Designers consciously moved away from illustration, by using it sparingly and began to use more photography. It was a shared interest among designers to communicate ideas universally and effectively. Therefore the style could be recognised world-wide.
The Basel School of Design and the Zurich School of Arts and Crafts were responsible for the strong Swiss Style influence on budding designers.
Designers decided that to have clean unfussy directness was the primary aim. This use of a neutral, universal style erased any ethnic, cultural and political differences.
The Swiss Style could be
characterised by:
Underlying grid structures
Asymmetrical Layouts
Sans-Serif Type
Straightforward objective photography
Geometric forms
Absence of decoration or illustration
Flush left, ragged right text
Max Bill (1908 – 1994) was a
Swiss architect, artist, painter, typeface designer, industrial designer and graphic designer. He was a product of the Bauhaus at Dessau, pupil of Walter Gropius, Vasily Kandinsky and Paul Klee.
He made a crucial contribution to graphic design when Switzerland had become the centre of the continuation of avant-garde ideas. Bill studied at the Bauhaus after training as a silversmith at the Zurich School of Arts & Crafts. He was a central figure in defining Swiss typography as the next development in
modernist graphic design	Max Bill
Poster for USA Builds exhibition, 1945
He admired Le Corbusier and sympathised with the idea that all
designers should be prepared as architects.
In 1944, he became a professor at the school of arts in Zurich. In 1953, he co-founded the Hochschule für Gestaltung in Ulm, Germany, a design school in the tradition of the Bauhaus. The school is notable for its inclusion of semiotics as a field of study. The school closed in 1968.
Among Bill's most famous designs is the "Ulmer Hocker", a stool that can also be used as a shelf or a side table. The stool was a creation of Bill and Ulm school designer, Hans Gugelot.
	
Max Bill Stadttheater - Juni-Festwochen,
1949
Max Bill Dokumentation uber Marcel Duchamp,
1960
Emil Ruder (1914–1970) was another individual who had a huge influence on the development of the Swiss Style. At the age of 15, Ruder began his design education when he took a compositor’s apprenticeship.
When Emil was in his late twenties, he attended the Zurich School of Arts & Crafts where Tschicold’s New Typography and principles of the Bauhaus were taught.
Emil Ruder
Neue Bauten, 1954
In 1947, Ruder co-operated in the founding of the Basel School. He published the basic grammar of typography titled "Emil Ruder: Typography". The book aided the spread and propagation of the Swiss Style, and became a basic text for graphic design and typography programs in Europe and North America.
In 1962 he helped to found the International Centre for the Typographic Arts in New York
Emil Ruder’s book “Emil Ruder Typography” was a major catalyst in the spread of International Typographic Style
This is a book jacket that Emil Ruder designed for an anthology of Dada poetry. The contrast created by combining different fonts becomes a graphic metaphor for the randomness of the Dadaists (seen right)
Ruder taught his students in Basel that typography loses its purpose when it loses its communicative meaning, therefore legibility and readability are dominant concerns. He believed in a balance between form and function.
He advocated a grid system to bring all elements – typography, photography, illustration, diagrams and charts – into harmony with each other while allowing design variety.
He also encouraged his students to develop a sensitivity to negative space including the space within letterforms.
	
From 1932-34 Josef Muller- Brockmann (1914 – 96) studied in the classes of Alfred Willimann and Ernst Keller (these men pioneered modern graphic design in the Zurich School of Arts & Crafts).
In 1936 he opened his Zurich studio specialising in graphic design, exhibition design and
photography.	Josef Muller Brockman
Muller-Brockmann’s mature style emerged after he worked as a freelance illustrator and stage designer. Example of this style can be seen in the concert posters for the Zurich Tonhalle in 1952.
From 1956-59, he taught Graphic Design in the Zurich School of Arts and Crafts as a successor to Ernst Keller.
From 1956-59, he taught Graphic Design in the Zurich School of Arts and Crafts as a successor to Ernst Keller.
Müller-Brockman was the author of "The Graphic Artist and his Design Problems", "Grid Systems in Graphic Design", the publications "History of the Poster" and "A History of Visual Communication".
Designs made by Muller- Brockmann in the 1950s are as current and vital as they were a half a century ago and communicate their message with clarity and intensity.
His photographic posters treat the image as an objective symbol, with neutral photographs gaining impact through scale and camera
angle.	Swiss Auto Club poster 1954.
Photography amplifies the text “the friendly hand sign protects against accidents”
Josef Muller-Brockmann designed this public awareness poster in 1960. The red type translates as “less noise” while the photograph graphically depicts the discomfort noise causes.
Josef Muller-Brockmann, “Music Viva” concert poster, 1959. Coloured squares march in musical rhythm on the tilted white square.
Typography and shapes align
in harmonious juxtaposition.
Max Bill & Josef Muller Brockmann used Akzidenz Grotesk throughout their careers.
It was the first sans serif typeface to be widely used and influenced many later neo-grotesque typefaces.
Paul Renner’s “Futura” was also a popular choice for Swiss designers.
In the 1950s new typefaces were introduced that were to prove to be hugely popular, even today.
The first typeface was Helvetica. It was created in 1953 by Eduard Hoffman of the Hass foundry in Zurich. Hoffmann had noticed the huge popularity of Akzidenz Grotesk and wanted to create his own typeface that he could use in his own business.
In 1951, Hoffmann commissioned Max Meidinger to create a font based on Akzidenz Grotesk and Neue Haas Grotesk was born.
The aim of the new design was to create a neutral typeface that had great clarity, had no intrinsic meaning in its form, and could be used on a wide variety of signage.
It was later sold to a German foundry and renamed “Helvetica”. Helvetica became the icon of international style and was the sans serif choice of a generation of typographers & designers.
French type foundry Deberny & Peignot wanted to add a linear sans serif type in several weights to the range of the Lumitype fonts.
In 1954, Adrian Frutiger, the foundry’s art director, suggested refraining from adapting an existing alphabet. He wanted to instead make a new font that would, above all, be suitable for the typesetting of longer texts — quite an exciting challenge for a sans-serif font at that time.
Starting with his old sketches from his student days at the School for the Applied Arts in Zurich, he created the Univers type family.
In 1957, the family was released by Deberny & Peignot, and afterwards, it was produced by Linotype.
Univers is unique because it became one of the first typefaces produced for use with phototypesetting systems.
Swiss style began to Internationalise due to official links between graduate programs at the Design School at Yale and that of the School of Applied Arts in Basel.
Student took part in exchange programmes and the American students carried their knowledge back to the States.
Another force that spread the style in the 1950s was the distribution of publications like “Neue Grafik”..
This publication was one of the primary organs for demonstrating the style & converting designers. Books like Josef Muller- Brockmann’s “Grid Systems in Graphic Design” and Emil Ruder’s “Typography” were widely translated and read worldwide.
European graphic designers worked in American companies and vice versa. All these elements contributed to the increase of interest in the style internationally.
All these elements contributed to the increase of interest in the style internationally.
The American designer, Rudolf de Harak, showed huge interest in Swiss design & in Japan a magazine called “Graphic Design” was established by Masaru Katsumi in 1959 which promoted the International Typographic Style.
Wolfgang Weingart (1941) studied design and the applied arts at the Merz academy in Stuttgart, before apprenticing himself to a printer.
He studied at the Allgemeine Kunstgewerbeschule in Basle, where the leading exponents of Swiss photography were teaching. He established himself there as an independent student in 1964, studying with Emil Ruder & Armin Hoffman.
However, he found that the teaching in Basle was leading to a point of stagnation. In his opinion International Typographic style was sterile & anonymous.
Due to social unrest of the student generation in the late 1960s, he decided to break the rules. In 1970, Emil Ruder died unexpectedly and Weingart was asked to take her place teaching.
Wolfgang experimented and broke all the rules. He broke the rules regarding the indentation of paragraphs and the spacing of letters, he upset the weights of typefaces, he challenged the rule of the right angle and played around with the grid.
Weingart was responsible for the identifiable characteristics of postmodernism. Weingarts teachings had a massive impact on the next generation of graphic designers namely his students April Greiman & Dan Friedman.
Wolfgang Weingart’s poster for an exhibition at the Kunsthalle in Basle. Here he broke all the rules by layering information and introducing different visual systems in one design.
	
	
The signage system developed for the US Department of Transport. Here we see the Swiss approach to abstraction and minimalism to arrive at symbols that could be universally understood.
Graphic Design – INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION