Research Techniques 
Fig. Perkins, Patrick (2017)Business & Work. Unsplash [Photograph]
The evolution of our common knowledge and the unveiling of new findings in every field of expertise is closely related to the success of good research work. 
Developing good research skills will be useful both for your academic work and professional practice, as you will learn to successfully analyse information by carefully planning your research, selecting appropriate investigation topics, evaluating your sources efficiently and analysing all information in order to achieve a solid and justified conclusion on your work. 
As a common rule, every research work will start with a problem, a question, that the researcher will aim at proposing a solution to. The theme, subject and focus of any research project should be clearly outlined and planned from the beginning. 
By understanding exactly what subject is under investigation and why, one will be better positioned to access and evaluate which sources and research methods are the most effective and adequate for the said study. 
Formal and Informal Research Methods
Formal research is a method of research that relies on scientific methods to collect and analyse information. It results in measurable data that can be replicated an applied to a wider group. It has an organised structure and follows all steps of the scientific method, starting by developing the research question, collecting information, reviewing literature, testing a hypothesis and drawing conclusions based on facts. 
Formal research requires objective data, thus preventing a biased view of the data collected. 
Examples of formal research can be:  Controlled data collection (i.e. phone surveys), field experiments, hypothesis testing, etc. 
Informal research, on the other hand, is a type of research that uses nonscientific methods to gather and analyse information. Its structure is not clear as it can be adjusted to both the researcher’s way of working and to the subject under investigation. 
Most of us will conduct informal research on a regular basis without even being aware of it, as it is such a comprehensive and more intuitive form of research. As a consequence, it is also more susceptible to errors and biased opinions. 
Examples of formal research can be: having conversations or informal interviews, drawing on prior experience, conducting surveys and pools, searching through documents, etc. 
Source credibility 
Fig. Ward, Russ (2018) ASME Code and Standard book [Photograph]
Finding credible sources with confirmed information is essential for the accuracy and success of your own research and information analysis. It is obviously difficult to fully evaluate at first sight if a source is credible or not, but there are some clues and factors (Buttram et al, 2012) that may help in selecting your research sources: 
Purpose: The purpose of the source of the information is an important clue to understanding if the information is reliable or not. Is the purpose of the source relevant to the subject in analysis? Is it directed at a relevant audience? 
Authority: Another way to confirm the credibility of your source is to analyse its author and affiliations. Who is the author? Are they part of a credited institution? Is the author relevant within the context of the subject? Do you know the author to be unbiased towards the subject? 
Currency: Refers to how relevant the source and information are in a certain time. Consider if the source provides up-date information, if it is based on recent studies and if it is in line with other current studies on the subject. 
Objectivity: Consulting objective and unbiased sources is a fundamental aspect to guarantee the success of your research and the accuracy of your conclusions. When consulting information it is important to ask yourself if the source shows any evidence of being biased or if it would profit from a particular point of view, to establish if the information provided is being used impartially. 
Depth: Alongside all previous indicators it is important to consider the detail and depth of the information provided by the source. Some sources may only analyse the subject in a very light way, so some information might be missing in order to achieve a complete analysis of the topic. Considering a wide variety of sources and cross-examining the information found is a good way to prevent any issues related to the depth of information. 
CRAAP tests - how to use them 
CRAAP is an acronym for Currency, Relevance, Authority, Accuracy, and Purpose. 
A CRAAP test is used to confirm and test the reliability of a source. Ask yourself the following questions when consulting a source: 
Is the source current? 
Is the source relevant?
Is the source authoritative? 
Is the source accurate? 
What is the purpose of the source? 
Collating information
UX Indonesia (2020) User Journey Map, Unsplash [Photograph]
After conducting research and collecting all data, the information will have to be organised so that it can be ready for further analysis: this process is called Collating. Collating methods and processes will vary depending on the nature of the information and its purpose. It will essentially help in evaluating the information in an initial stage, arranging it so that its meaning and connection are more evident, organising it in terms of categories, and relevance and evaluating its usefulness for a more complete analysis of the subject. 
This collating process will also help in understanding if the information is sufficient, identifying any existent gaps or missing data and also removing any information that can now be found to be unnecessary or irrelevant for the analysis of the subject. 
Examples of collating processes and methods include: 
Filing documents
Summarising data 
Labelling and ordering items 
Categorizing information 
Using software to store and organise information (i.e. excel tables, charts, etc)
Tabulate data 
Etc. 
This collating process will also facilitate the storage of the information so that it can later be used or accessed in a more intuitive way. 