Graphic Design
Lesson 9 – script
Packaging Design

Packaging design is so much more than making a box or a carton to house a product. 
Designing packaging involves careful configuration and construction.
https://elements.envato.com/packaging-design-designer-comes-up-with-the-concep-RCYQ5G7
The same elements and principles of graphic design will also apply to packaging design.
But this time the elements line – shape – form - colour – texture - space and value - will also take on a 3-dimensional meaning.  
https://www.istockphoto.com/photo/designer-sketching-drawing-design-brown-craft-cardboard-paper-product-eco-packaging-gm1156277170-315074077
Think of shape, form, texture, and space for example. These are now being applied to the actual shape and form of the packaging. Texture will now also refer to the physical feeling of the packaging and space can relate to the amount of space the package will take up.
When it comes to the design principles 
Balance - Contrast - Alignment – Hierarchy - Composition - Repetition and Proximity
They will remain as important to the design on the packaging as in any other graphic design.
But before you go to the drawing board, ask yourself this..
What is the product? Who is the product for? And How will it be used?
https://www.istockphoto.com/photo/box-maker-holding-square-food-container-in-her-fingers-gm1217589061-355470190
While these may seem like obvious questions, they are in fact the starting block for everything that comes next.
So, let’s break it down.
The first thing a graphic designer must do is clarify what the product is. 
What exactly will be packaged? 
Is it liquid, solid, weighty, fragile, edible, cosmetic or clothing for example? 
Does the packaging need to be very large or very small and what materials will it be made from? 
Then the designer must learn who the product is for?
Is it a male or female orientated product? Is it for elderly or young people or is it a luxury product or a low-cost item. 
All of this information will help inform the designers on things like colour palette and style of design. It will also provide an insight into how much information needs to be included on the  packaging. For example, medical or food products will need space for contents and government warnings.
Then the graphic designer must establish HOW the packaging will be used. If it is a product for online shopping, then delivery packaging must also be taken into account. There may also be a need for inner packaging and baggage. If it is a delicate or fragile item, the inner package must protect it and likewise if it is liquid or food.  If the product is solely for use on the shelves of a supermarket, then size, shape, materials, and the stacking of the items will need to be considered. It will also need to be eye-catching to stand out from the numerous competitors it will share that shelf space with. 
https://elements.envato.com/logistician-puts-a-label-on-the-packaging-PB4JVX9
Many packages will also include a legal requirement to include certain information. Food, cosmetics, and pharmaceuticals all need a large amount of data such as health warnings, weight, allergy warnings and various other safety details. The designer will need to become familiar with the necessary requirements and allow space on the packaging for this to be included.
https://elements.envato.com/young-woman-picking-a-jar-of-chickpeas-from-the-sh-UGJUKHF
https://elements.envato.com/a-white-woman-is-in-the-grocery-department-of-a-st-XFS9BGB
This sort of data can also change from time to time so it may be necessary to include a space for a sticker.
Another important factor that a designer must be aware of before diving into a design, is the budget. There are many variables in budget planning, and this can create limitations on the choices the designer will have to make. If the package is to be mass produced for example, this will use a different quality material to a once off luxury package. 
https://unsplash.com/photos/zNNKwZSDDk8
https://unsplash.com/photos/7x4JqWmksSg
Once you have established the budget and the What, Who and How. Plus you are clear on the legal and commercial requirements for the label, then you can begin your research. 
https://unsplash.com/photos/2o6o2yvyQPc
First look at your competitors. How can you stand out from other similar brands and how can you attract attention?  
https://elements.envato.com/a-shopper-girl-approaches-a-supermarket-window-and-N554D24
Research typography, advertisements, posters, anything at all that catches your eye. Take  your inspiration from all around you.  
https://unsplash.com/photos/bNFQifjZNbY
https://unsplash.com/photos/Qi0RgGzKEUk
https://unsplash.com/photos/RfBdm1RsyWs
Refer again to the elements and principles of graphic design and use them as a guide to help you design your packaging. 
When you have arrived at one of the final iterations of your design, take a step back and check that you have remained true to the brief. Your design choices must accurately and truthfully represent the product. You must also be sure that your choice of colour, font and imagery is an appropriate representation of the product. It’s okay to try something different but be careful not to mislead the customer.
Ask for opinions and get feedback on your choices.
It is important to create a mockup of your package design. You will need to see it in 3D and judge how your branding and layout is working. If it is a product for a shelf in a store, does it face the right way and does it display the right information? What will it look like next to its competitors and does the quality feel like it’s sturdy enough for the job?
https://www.istockphoto.com/photo/designer-sketching-drawing-design-brown-craft-cardboard-paper-product-eco-packaging-gm1154796446-314152085
This is also an opportunity to present the packaging to the client . Then they can hold it in their hands and get a true feeling for it. Ask the same pertinent questions you would ask in any presentation. The mock up is generally the penultimate iteration.
https://www.pexels.com/photo/person-holding-a-box-of-sweets-14275717/
Some packages may need to be designed with future modifications in mind. Perhaps more flavours of soup or a cosmetic line for men and women. It is wise to think ahead so that the brand and package remains recognisable even when modified.
Packaging that is reusable is not only good for the environment, but it means the branding will remain out in the public eye for longer. Canvas tote bags or cans, and bottles or jars that can be upcycled are a great way to create reusable packaging.
Packaging is a multi-faceted design process where branding, functionality and creativity are combined.
A successfully designed package can have the same longevity as any work of art.
(image suggestion of Campbell's soup can?)