
Because you will spend hours and days developing packaging designs, it is only natural that you would like to see your hard work pay off and your design be utilised. To achieve this, your design must meet all the relevant standards for packaging design otherwise, you will fail your client and/or the end user, and may even end up with a hefty fine! But rest assured, quality packaging can be both attractive and practical.
The packaging of a product can be classed in two ways:
item-specific packaging (label/s) or 
outer box/sleeve packaging.
Fig 1. Unsplash (n.d.) Item-specific packaging and outer box.
The design of both of these forms of packaging must always consider the end use of the product, its storage requirements (fridge, cool cupboard etc.), and interaction with the product within. Once you know the end use of the product you can then make an informed decision regarding the material/s used to house the product or perhaps the label that needs to adhere to the product in some way.
Legal Requirements
Packaging design must conform to the government legislation and regulatory standards of the countries or regions where your packaging/product will be manufactured, transported, and distributed. Legal requirements related to packaging design are not there to impede your creativity but rather to ensure that the:
product contents are represented clearly and truthfully
product contents are protected under normal conditions (from handling and distribution to retail and end use)
packaging is constructed using materials that have no adverse effect on the product
packaging promotes consideration for the environment
product contents are effectively communicated, and
the consumer is protected from false claims (Klimchuk, n.d.).
Fit for purpose
The packaging you choose to use for a product needs to be fit for the intended use of the product itself. For example, if the product is designed to be used in the shower or bath, the label that goes onto the bottle will need to be waterproof and not degrade or fail when wet. A food product that is stored in the fridge or freezer needs a label that is capable of withstanding cool temperatures, etc. If the label fails to remain intact, then the product inside will be unidentifiable and will be either wasted or the directions for use are no longer available to the user.
Fig 2. Pixabay (n.d.) Refrigerated products
As a graphic designer, you also have the responsibility to help point your client/s to a greener more eco-friendly packaging solution for their product/s. ‘Fit for purpose’ therefore includes thinking about sustainability and making design decisions that would lessen the impact your packaging will have on the environment, especially after use. For example, consider what type of packaging materials can be easily recycled after it has been discarded, or whether the packaging has an appropriate product-to-package ratio (i.e. don’t design unnecessarily oversized packaging).
Fig 3. Unsplash (n.d.) Sustainable packaging
Food Packaging
When it comes to displaying certain mandatory information, food and beverage packaging requires particularly careful consideration. All food labelling must contain accurate information that is not vague or misleading. Different countries will have their own requirements as to the information that must be legally included on the label and outer packaging etc. Certain food types such as bread, honey, fish, etc. are largely controlled by very specific regulations.
Fig 4. Unsplash (n.d.) Food and beverage packaging examples
The following information must be included:
The name of the food - clearly stated and not misleading
Any process that the food has gone through - smoking or drying for example
Ingredients list - if the food product has two or more ingredients (including water and additives).
Ingredients should be listed in order of weight with the main ingredient first.
Allergen information - there are 14 allergens that must be declared by law. These need to be emphasised and highlighted within the main list of ingredients.
Net quantity of the packaged food (food packaged in water should show the drained net weight)
A best-before or use-by date along with how and where to store them
Manufacturer name and address (imported or not)
Country of origin
Product (non-food) packaging
Just like food products, packaging for non-foods should also present all the information and it must be accurate and not misleading, specifically regarding:
Size/quantity of the product
Price of the product (if displayed)
What the product is made of (metal, paper, plastics etc)
Where and how was it made
What the product does and how it can be used
Any endorsing or approval bodies involved with the product
Safety information - how the product should be used
Cosmetic Labelling Requirements
Cosmetic product labelling needs to account for laws and legislation to prevent users from harm and also in relation to protecting the environment (when using the contents of the product). 
Fig 5. Unsplash (n.d.) Cosmetic product packaging examples
Packaging for cosmetic products needs to include:
Production details
Contact information of the producing company
Ingredients list
Batch information
Function or intended use of the product
Net weight
Best Before date
Any precautions or warnings on usage
Medicinal Labelling Requirements
Medicine labels must be printed directly onto the product packaging and should include: 
warnings for safe use, 
statutory warnings, and 
other precautionary notices depending on the contents. 
Fig 6. Unsplash (n.d.) Medicinal tablets packaging example
In countries like Britain, medicine packaging should also include the relevant information in braille.
Hazardous Labelling Requirements
Hazardous product labels should always be firmly attached to one or more sides of the packaging and show: 
the name and contact details of the supplier
the quantity of the product substance
product identifiers
hazard pictograms, signal words, hazard and precautionary statements, and 
any other applicable information.
Fig 7. Unsplash (n.d.) Chemical product packaging example
References
Klimchuk, M.R. (n.d) Packaging Design: Successful Product Branding From Concept to Shelf, 2nd Edition. Available at: https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/packaging-design-successful/9781118358603/chap03-sec085.html.