A condensed History of Graphic Design - Part 2
Art and visual expression have been in existence since the dawn of man. Throughout the ages, art movements have been a reflection of society at large and towards the end of the 19th century, many exciting avant garde art movements were emerging with a more design centric approach. The arrival of the 20th century would herald a new age in design where typography, advertising and book design became a design practice in their own right. But these were still relatively new methods and had yet to be defined.
It was in 1922 that book designer and typographer William Addison Dwiggins would first give a name to this art form. In an essay titled ‘New Kind of Printing Calls for New Design’ Dwiggins would first bestow the title ‘Graphic Design’ on his designs. The term Graphic Design was used to explain how he structured and organised visuals in his work.
In this section you will learn about:
Art Nouveau
The Arts and Crafts Movement
Constructivism
De Stijl
Bauhaus
Art Nouveau
The western world was enjoying a peaceful hiatus and with that came opportunities for freedom of expression and exploration. It was the late 19th century and a period of relative prosperity. This led to a growth in upper and upper-middle classes who would enthusiastically support new experimental directions in design. 
From the artists of Belgium and France came the development of a new movement in design, Art Nouveau. 
Art Nouveau was an international decorative style that thrived around the two decades from 1890 to around 1910. 
Like many art movements, Art Nouveau was a response to cultural, political and social periods that had come before. 
The Art Nouveau style was based on:
A rejection of Victorian styles
A rejection of historical imitation
Take advantage of developments with modern materials - iron, glass
Close relationship with fine art
Inspired by nature - flowers, vines, feathers, shells
Curvilinear forms were dominant themes both in structural elements and in ornamentation
Art as a part of everyday life
Art Nouveau artists believed that their creativity should encompass all areas of design including architecture, furniture, product design, fashion, and indeed graphics. This would lead directly to posters, packages, and advertisements, not to mention teapots, dishes, spoons, chairs, subway entrances and houses. The artist's aim was to create a “total work of art”. Art nouveau graphic designers and illustrators attempted to make art a part of everyday life.
The name 'Art Nouveau' was derived from the name of a store in Paris, Salon de l'Art Nouveau, that showcased objects that followed this approach to design. 
Art Nouveau is easily identified by its ethereal yet organic style. Images often include floral and vine swirls, flowers and birds (particularly peacocks). The human female form was also frequently present and generally central to the design.
Art Nouveau cannot be dismissed as simple decoration. This movement played a pivotal role in the evolution of all aspects of design. This was a vital period in architecture and the applied arts, because it formed a bridge between Victorian clutter and modernism. The Victorians had previously consulted historical approaches for design solutions but artists of the 20th century had their eyes firmly fixed on the future..
Ideas, processes, and designs of the twentieth-century have greatly benefited from the catalyst that Art Nouveau contributed to these developments.  Modern architecture, graphic and industrial design, surrealism, and abstract art had their seeds sown in art nouveau’s fundamental concepts.
Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec
Toulouse-Lautrec (1864 - 1901) was the first artist to elevate advertising to the status of a fine art. This is a monumental shift in the history of art, dissolving the boundaries between so-called high-art (painting and sculpture) and low-art (posters, logos and other forms of popular culture).
Lautrec was fascinated with Japanese art and impressionism and he would roam the salons and cabarets of Paris observing, sketching and creating his drawing journalistic, illustrative style. He was capturing the lively nightlife of la belle epoque, a term used to describe glittering late nineteenth-century Paris. This translates as The beautiful era.
He drew directly on the lithographic stone, often working from memory. An he always carried an old toothbrush which he used to achieve tonal effects through a splatter technique. The flat silhouette, unmodified colour, and curvilinear drawing also clearly display how Japanese print art has influenced his style. 
ALPHONSE MUCHA
Czech artist Alphonse Mucha (1860 –1939) was a prominent artist during the The Art Nouveau period and can be applauded for allowing this movement to live up to its ‘New Art’ moniker.
Mucha was an Art Nouveau painter and decorative artist with a distinct personal style. He produced numerous paintings, advertisements and designs. He also produced lithographed posters for Victorien Sardou’s play Gismonda famously starring Sarah Bernhardt.
His was a new artistic style and the Art Nouveau movement was strongly influenced by his work.
Initially called the Style Mucha, (Mucha Style), this soon became known as Art Nouveau.
Poster for Victorien Sardou’s Gismonda starring Sarah Bernhardt at the Théâtre de la Renaissance in Paris., 1894
Jugend was a German art magazine launched in the late 19th century. It featured many famous Art Nouveau artists and is the source of the term "Jugendstil" ("Jugend-style"), the German version of Art Nouveau
Arts and Crafts Movement
The Arts and Crafts Movement was a profoundly influential and far-reaching design movement of modern times. It began in Britain around 1880 and quickly spread across America and Europe before emerging finally as the Mingei (Folk Crafts) movement in Japan.
The ethos of this artist’s community was to look back to when things were handcrafted with skill and learnt over time. The Industrial Revolution mechanised typesetting and printing which led to a widespread availability of printed materials and many were worried that this would lead to the permanent loss of these skills.
The Arts and Crafts Movement was an idealistic movement that grew out of a concern for the effects of industrialisation on design, on craft skills and on the lives of ordinary people. In response, it established a new set of principles for living and working. It advocated the reform of art at every level and across a broad social spectrum.
William Morris (1834 –1896)
The leader of the Arts and Crafts movement  was designer, writer and activist William Morris (1834 –1896). He went on to establish his own company producing wallpapers, textiles, carpets, tapestries and books using traditional methods, materials and themes.
But what exactly was the Arts and Crafts Movement trying to communicate?
The primary goal was to encourage creatives to return to the hand-crafting of artefacts and to unify beauty and functionality. 
This was a response to industrialisation and the potential death of craftsmanship. During the 1860s and 1870s architects, designers and artists began to pioneer new approaches to design and the decorative arts. These, in turn, led to the foundation of the Arts and Crafts Movement. 
Its pioneering spirit of reform, and the value it placed on the quality of materials and design, as well as life, shaped the world we live in today.
Wallpaper Design by William Morris
The Works of Geoffrey Chaucer published in 1896 by the Kelmscott Press was the culmination of William Morris's vision for an ideal book. It embodied his love of mediaeval literature and art, as well as his love of beauty.
Detail of The Works of Geoffrey Chaucer published in 1896 by the Kelmscott Press
The Scottish Movement 
In the late 1880's and 90's, more than 20 years after Morris had established his first shop in London, The Scottish movement emerged. 
It was the Glasgow School of Art (GSA) that was at the centre of The Scottish movement and was home to four major figures in the movement.
Charles Rennie Mackintosh, 
Herbert MacNair, 
Margaret & Frances MacDonald 
These key figures were known as 'The Four' who together created the vision which became the world famous Glasgow Style.
Charles Rennie Mackintosh: 
Charles Rennie Mackintosh (1868 –1928) was a Scottish architect, designer, water colourist and artist. He was also one of the founding members of the Glasgow School of
Art; a very influential school dedicated to progress.
His designs incorporated elements of both the Arts and Crafts movement as well as Art Nouveau. He completely shunned any historicism in his work and hints of early modernism can be detected in his strict geometric style. 
The designers of the Arts and Crafts period not only were responsible for the spaces they created but also the furniture & fixtures. (see interior of Glasgow School of Art below)
Mackintosh is widely known for his furniture designs where he often used simple geometries and then creatively exaggerated features of the piece to introduce his own signature design style.
Constructivism- 1913-1933 Russia
It was 1913 in Russia and a group of artists and architects with a shared interest in industrialist abstraction got together. This would be the birth of Constructivism.
Constructivism describes a trend in the fields of painting, sculpture and for the first time,  kinetics. The artist's approach was to combine applied arts and architecture with machine production.
In 1920, the movement wrote their “Realist Manifesto” which set out their primary intentions. Their aim was to “construct art”, which led to the name, constructivist. 
The manifesto also declared the group's fascination with modern industrial materials and machinery. As a group of artists, their approach was to think like an engineer and move towards more mechanical, practical methods.  The artists believed in austerity within abstract ideas and would create art with industrial and practical materials.
Key Ideas
Constructivism was very deliberately entrenched in modernity. The art was experimentally abstract using primarily geometric shapes. Constructivist art has an air of optimism but the artist's perspective was typically that of pure objectivity with no intention of expressing individuality or human emotion. The work completely lacks a stylized approach but instead favours universality through industrial construction.
A famous Rodchenko photomontage (1924) for a Moscow publisher in which Lilya Brik, the muse of the poet Vladimir Mayakovsky, joyously cries out 'books’!
EL LISSITZKY
El Lissitzky (1890 - 1941) was one of the most innovative and proficient designers of the constructivist paradigm.
Lissitzky developed a painting style known as PROUNS which is an acronym for the Russian words that translate as ‘projects for the affirmation of the new’. His work would challenge the rules of perspective as set out by previous renaissance artists, and introduce a new volume depending on the new orientation. Lissitzky’s audience were forced to question their relationship with the composition and rethink their viewpoint. His visual approach to space and balance became the basis for his work in graphic design and architecture. 
Book cover for
The Isms of Art (1924)
El Lissitzky
Russian Exhibition poster
(1929)
El Lissitzky
De Stijl: The Netherlands 1917-1931
De Stijl which translates as "the style” was a Dutch art movement also known as neoplasticism, that spanned from 1917 to 1931. De Stijl was also a journal published by the Dutch artists and critic Theo van Doesburg in support of the movement. 
The philosophy was based on functionalism where the work is reduced to simplistic shapes and colour. There is a sense of severity in the doctrine that translates to the designs. De Stijl artists used geometric shapes of only primary colours and black, white and grey. The images resemble a grid framework with flawless lines and arrangements. No other decoration or variations of primary colours could exist.  
Doesburg and Piet Mondrian’s infamous line and primary colour paintings were leading styles of De Stijl artwork. There was only form and function, thereby making De Stijl in effect the ultimate style.
Many of the same ideas that incorporated the "machine" aesthetics of the new industrial age were at work and one of the important trends of the 20th century would be the increasing parallels between art and design, which had been separated since the end of the renaissance.
De Stijl artists applied their style to a variety of media from fine art to applied arts and more.
De Stijl's influence was arguably most prominent in architectural work where it was integral to the rise of the International Style of the 1920s and 1930s. De Stijl artists also thrived in traditional mediums such as painting and sculpture, but practically all other art forms, including literature, industrial design and typography. 
1920 by Piet Mondrian
The eventual demise of the De Stijl movement was the tragic realisation that their utopian vision could never exist in the real world.
But the best-known member and true modern master, Piet Mondrian (1872 - 1944) can be thanked for the enduring presence and continued admiration and influence of the De Stijl movement.
Bauhaus Germany 1919 - 1933
Germany was the birthplace of a revolution in modern design and The Bauhaus school of art and architecture of the early 20th century was at the centre of this shift. 
One of the founders of the Bauhaus school of art was Walter Gropius (1883 - 1969). It was his form-follows-function philosophy that would fundamentally transform how people appreciate the general aesthetics of the time and would challenge their previous understanding of  architecture, advertising, and even typography.
Bauhaus was home to many of the most notable contemporary architects and artists and was not only an innovative training facility but also a thriving production space and the focus of international debate.
Bauhaus began with an utopian definition that was to combine all the arts in ideal unity.  
"The building of the future" 
Some of the greatest designers of the 20th century were participants in the Bauhaus movement, including Walter Gropius, Marcel Breuer, Vassily Kandinsky, Paul Klee, Josef Albers, and László Moholy-Nagy.
Under Walter Gropius, the idea had evolved to "art and technology - a new unity". His goal was to marry industrial techniques and creative design standards. The goal was to produce goods that were both functional and aesthetically pleasing.
The Bauhaus workshops produced prototypes for mass production. Theoretically, they would then be mass produced and marketed to the consumer. The Bauhaus product line ranged from anything from a solitary desk lamp to an entire home.
Joost Schmidt’
Poster for the 1923 Bauhaus Exhibition in Weimar
The New Typography – 1920s and 1930’s
The graphic design contribution to the Bauhaus movement was "New Typography".
Bauhaus wanted to express “clarity of the message in its most emphatic form" with a  mantra that became “simplify, simplify, simplify.” It was this that transformed graphics and information design into the avant-garde of design in Central Europe.
Previously, type had been traditionally arranged in symmetrical columns but modernist designers began breaking these rules and would approach the page as a blank canvas. Often using photomontage, illustration  and blocks of type, they would create asymmetrical compositions with harmonious results. 
Jan Tschichold. Die Frau ohne Namen. 1927. Offset Lithograph, 48 3/4 × 34″ (123.8 × 86.4 cm). The Museum of Modern Art. Peter Stone Poster Fund
Designer Jan Tschichol (1902 - 1974) was so inspired by his  first visit to the Weimar Bauhaus exhibition in 1923, that he would go on to combine this epiphany with his own Soviet Russia influences and produce Die Neue Typographie (1928). This landmark book provided a catalogue of accessible guidelines for New Typography. It was immediately adopted by printers and typographers as a new way of working for a variety of printed work including brochures, magazines to books and business cards and everything in between. 
.
Jan Tschichol
Jan Tschichold
Display poster for a publisher (1924)
In the end, it was the Nazis who would shut down the Bauhaus and in 1933 Tschichold and his wife were arrested for being a "cultural Bolshevik" and creating "un-German" typography.