Every graphic design journey begins with a sketch. Sketching is an important part of the design process. Whether you are designing a poster or a landing page for a website, or even if you are just collecting ideas for your next project, sketching will support your creativity and will help you to produce better designs, and more of them. 
Sketching is all about getting ideas down on the page. It is a way of experimenting freely, before committing yourself to a design. It is also a way of analysing existing graphic designs to identify what works, and to find inspiration for your own projects. 
Why keep a sketchbook?
Carrying a sketchbook with you means you can:
note down ideas whenever inspiration strikes
keep a record of design development
see how your skills grow over time
build a repository of ideas and inspiration 
identify your interests and design inspirations
grow your visual language
Ideally, you should have your sketchbook with you at all times. Adding sketches and thoughts while in the moment, means you will have a wide selection of ideas to draw upon when working on a specific project. Using your sketchbook regularly can require discipline and consistency but it has the potential to be one of your most valuable assets as a creative professional. 
Graphic Designers use sketchbooks to:
sketch out ideas for different designs e.g. logos, layouts, fonts, etc. 
identify good ideas (and weed out bad ones)
experiment widely and go further with their creativity
collect images to inspire the design process
collect typeface examples to inspire the design process
play with colour, texture, layout etc.
analyse inspiring designs by deconstructing the elements and principles
re-create inspirational designs to examine why they work (or don’t work),
keep notes on design ideas. 
keep a record of the design process, from initial inspiration to finished designs
show working ideas to other team members to illustrate ideas or thoughts
How to use a sketchbook 
There is no one way to use a sketchbook. How you organise it and what you put in it can be as personal as keeping a diary. However, if you want to get the most out of your sketchbook, then it is important to have some structure. 
Structuring your sketchbook means there is some organisation or flow to your sketchbook. This can mean having one section for pencil sketches, another for collecting inspiring images and another for analysing graphics that inspire you. It might also mean having longer sections of a sketchbook devoted to a particular project. This way you can see the development process as your designs take shape. 
Fig 1. Pexels (n.d.) Sketchbook
Using a sketchbook for ideas generation. 
Generating ideas is an essential process for all creatives. It is a way of:
finding different ways to begin a project, after being given a brief and/or a set of materials
examining a problem and identifying possible solutions at any stage in a project
identifying different ways to address a specific task within a larger project
Importantly, idea generation allows you to test out different options to find the best solutions to a problem while also weeding out the unworkable ones. It also means that by testing out ideas in the sketchbook first, you can find potential problems at earlier stages of a project. This will both save your time and your client’s budget. 
If you are naturally creative, it may seem unnecessary to call special attention to idea generation techniques. Many creative people have an intuitive sense of developing ideas, but even the most instinctively creative among us, need to understand that idea generation is in fact a skill. When creativity is a part of your profession, it is essential to possess the ability to come up with good, innovative ideas especially when ideas are not automatically coming to you. There will be occasions in your career where you do not have an immediate solution for a project, task, or problem. Ideas generation is challenging for both new and experienced designers and can be difficult to know where to start. However, there are several techniques you can use to support the process. 
Gather any information you already know about
A good starting point for idea generation is to gather all the information you have and keep a summary of it in your sketchbook. For example, imagine a theatre company is producing a new version of Hamlet by Shakespeare. The director has shown you the plan for the stage set design, the costumes, and photographs of the lead actors. You have read a summary of the story and have looked up some old sample posters of previous versions of the play. 
Fig 2. Pixabay (n.d.) Old version of Hamlet poster
The poster will appear outside the theatre but it will also be in a trailer that will be created for YouTube, on a range of social media or on a dedicated website (where people can book tickets). 
To start generating ideas with this information you might examine:
The elements of the story, e.g. character, theme, props etc.
The stage set design, e.g. settings, colour palettes etc.
Vital information for the poster e.g. name of the play, dates, theatre address, production company logo, social media icons, actors names etc.
The texture of the costumes
The silhouette of the actors
How the tone of the play can be communicated through typeface
If you are trying to solve a problem at a later stage in a project, it can be helpful to write down exactly what the problem is, how it arose, the main consequences of the problem and what resources you have available to resolve the issue. Then you can test several different ideas to resolve the problem - noting the strengths and weaknesses of each solution. 
Set aside time for creative thinking
Whether working on a project or just working on ideas, it is important to regularly set aside some time to freely explore and experiment. This means finding a quiet place where you won’t be interrupted, turning off your phone and other devices so you won’t be distracted and just sitting with your sketchbook and drawing materials, sketching and testing out different options. 
Fig 3. Pixabay (n.d.) Setting time aside for creative thinking
Creative thinking means allowing ideas to flow. Try not to be too critical about your ideas here. Everything is worth investigating, even ideas that you are sure ‘won’t work’. You will eventually select the best options but for now, give yourself the freedom to explore. 
It is also important to accept that this process will take some time. You might not find the perfect solution straight away. This can be difficult when you have clients and tight deadlines, but it is important not to rush the process, within reasonable boundaries. 
Mind-Map to Brainstorm
A mind map is a diagram used to visually organise information. It is often created around a single concept that is drawn as an image or a word in the centre of a blank landscape page. Images, words, and parts of words are added; flowing outwards from the central concept. It is a free form process that allows you to make different associations with a particular word, concept or image.
You can create several mind maps to explore different ideas. For example, thinking about the poster for Hamlet, you might start with the concept of ‘Fathers and Sons’ (a key theme of the play) and then brainstorm different associations. A different mind map might contain the image of an actor holding up a skull (this is a very common depiction of the character Hamlet), as the central concept. Then, you might sketch a letter A, with the outline shape of the skull contained within it, as an idea flowing from the central concept. 
Brainstorming helps visualise both connections and hierarchy amongst ideas. With this technique, you can quickly explore various ideas and establish creative connections. It also means you are less likely to jump into the first or most obvious idea. Often the first idea you think of is too obvious, overdone or cliched. In order to arrive at fresh and new ideas it is useful to identify what has been done before. Mind mapping is a quick way of getting from old ideas to new ones. 
With a complete mind map, you can then look for various ideas that might offer creative connections or overlaps that help you generate new perspectives or ideas.
Fig 4. Pixabay (n.d.) Example of a mind map
Six Thinking Hats
Another popular technique is Six Thinking Hats (The de Bono Group, n.d.). In this technique you adopt six different perspectives to approach your task, project or problem.
Fig 5. Six Thinking Hats
This technique offers a good structure in which to view your problem from different perspectives. It also allows you to explore and develop other perspectives. For example, how would the person you most or least respect approach this problem? Adopting these different personas can allow you to re-think the problem. This can be highly effective in pushing your own creativity. 
Try adding a page to your sketchbook that outlines the problem or task from the perspective of one of these hats. Then using this perspective, sketch out ideas or possible solutions. 
The good, the bad and the ugly
This technique is simple but effective in allowing you to move beyond your initial ideas. What we mean by the good, the bad and the ugly is to record three of your more instinctual ideas. You can use words, images, sketches, etc here in your sketchbook.
The good – this is your best idea. This is the idea that does not care about practical concerns or budgetary concerns. Essentially, this is the idea that you would pursue if there were no further challenges.
The bad – this is your worst idea. This is the idea that explores all the possibilities that should not be pursued because it solves the problem poorly or without consideration of any realistic concerns.
The ugly – this is the boring, obvious or cliched idea. What is the idea that solves the problem but with no creativity or innovation?
What this technique accomplishes is that it lets your mind release some of these more instinctual ideas. Putting these ideas in your sketchbook means they no longer occupy your headspace. Instead, you are left with a clear mind that can begin exploring the ideas that are likely somewhere in the middle of the good, the bad, and the ugly. 
Experiment and analyse with elements and principles
Sometimes, examining the work of others in detail, is a powerful way of unlocking your creativity. Using your understanding of the elements and principles of design here. It will give you a foundation to build upon. For example, explore the landing page of a website you admire. In your sketchbook, re-create the colour palette, sketch the layout of the page or draw some sample text in the typeface used. 
Fig 6. Pixabay (n.d.) Experiment with different colour schemes
You may also sketch out the landing page, but change a key feature such as re-arranging the layout, creating a simple line drawing of a textured image or moving the alignment of an image in the logo. 
You can also use this technique with your own ideas. Take an initial idea and change some aspect of it. Then try changing a second element, or a third element. Examine whether or not it makes the idea worse or better. 
Analyse different media
Sometimes examining subjects that are not graphic designs can help you to generate creative ideas. For example, go for a walk and examine the colour palette, line and texture of your surroundings. Take your sketchbook with you and record what you see. 
Another option is to take inspiration from fashion, interior design, photography, literature, music, product design, film or any other area. Consider how the elements and principles you have learned apply to these fields. How can you take inspiration from these subjects? For example, you might take the sheet music from your favourite song and sketch out the lines and symbols a musician might use to read the music. 
Fig 7. Pexels (n.d.) Take inspiration from other creative areas
Research
Research is a very important aspect of any project and it can take many forms. Primary visual research for example can take the form of sketching or photographing real objects or places. You can also visit museums and galleries with inspirational artworks, taking your sketchbook with you to note ideas. This type of research is a way of discovering your own interests which, in turn, will help you to develop your own personal visual language. 
Secondary research for ideas generation is about collecting existing images that inspire you and analysing them (using the techniques outlined earlier). It can also mean examining different design movements or doing case studies of specific designers, to understand their work methods and how they create their unique visual language. Collecting this information in a sketchbook is a good way to make sure you have it available later on in a project. 
Fig 8. Pexels (n.d.) Conducting research
It is also important to keep a list or reference of the sources you use. For example, if you print out an image of a logo from an online newspaper and add it to your sketchbook, you should keep a note of the name, date and URL where you found the image. Later you might find you want to examine the logo in its original layout. It will save you a lot of time if you have the source information at hand. 
These are just a few techniques, but there are many others. As your creativity grows and strengthens, you will explore and experiment with various techniques you can use to generate ideas. Determine the technique that works best for you and ascertain which techniques are comfortable, natural, and most effective for your own creative process. 
Focus on the fundamentals
One of the advantages of generating ideas in a sketchbook is that you don’t need to create the entire project in one go. In the same way that a painter might do several small sketches of details before going to the canvas, you can identify possible sections of your design, and test out ideas without worrying about the overall vision. Also, you may not have everything figured out yet. A sketchbook allows you to to work on the sections you are ruminating on while creating ‘placeholders’ for parts you are still unsure of. 
It is important to take advantage of this to help focus on the fundamentals. This means, understanding and developing the key parts of the design, rather than worrying about minor issues.
How to analyse the results of idea generation
The most important part of the idea generation process is the analysis of what you produce. Among the ideas you have recorded, you should always take some time to evaluate and critique. Comparing, contrasting and identifying the potential value of these ideas will determine how you can take them forward into more refined ideas that you present to clients and other stakeholders. 
In looking at the ideas created via your idea generation process, consider the following: 
What are the pros and cons of each idea? 
What are the opportunities and what are the limitations? 
What are the benefits and what are the costs? 
Comparing these characteristics will help you determine which ideas are worth exploring further and which ideas should be abandoned early on. Doing much of this work in your sketchbook will save you time and effort since you are more likely to find and remove ideas that are uncreative, don’t meet the client's brief or are otherwise unworkable, at an early stage. 
A note on materials
There are many types and sizes of sketchbooks available.
A3 size works well as it provides enough room to show a flow of ideas on one page. It also allows for sketches to be large enough to identify details
A spiral bound sketchbook also works well as unnecessary pages can be easily removed.
There are plenty of different types of paper, however, it’s best to stay away from heavy cream coloured art notepaper as your work will look crisper in sketchbooks with lighter white paper. Lightweight paper is also easier to trace from. Some design students like to work with a layout pad when carrying out design development. It has slightly transparent paper, which allows for tracing but is more expensive than a regular sketchbook.
Try to find a sketchbook with a plain cover, there are many available on the market. This helps to give your portfolio a cohesive look and also enables you to customise the cover to suit your project or to tie-in with your own branding for the portfolio. 
Materials used for sketching 
Fig 9. Pixabay (n.d.) Drawing tools
Every designer has their own preference for the art materials that work best for them. Below are a few guidelines, but try to experiment with different art materials to see what works best for you.
Pencils
Pencils range in hardness with 9H being the hardest and 9B being the softest. The full range of drawing pencil grades are:
9H, 8H, 7H, 6H, 5H, 4H, 3H, 2H, H, HB, F, B, 2B, 3B, 4B, 5B, 6B, 7B, 8B, 9B
The darkness of graphite varies from very light grey (9H) to pitch black (9B). The hardest pencils create lighter, thinner lines, while the softest pencils create darker, thicker lines.
A HB pencil is a good all rounder and 2b is good for adding some depth to a drawing. H pencils are, generally, too hard and light for sketching.
If using pencils, it is vital that you keep them sharp. Many designers prefer to use good quality pop-up pencils.
Felt tip pens are the best pens to use and many companies produce a variety of tip sizes. It’s a good idea to have three pencils of varying thickness:
0.3 for general drawing,
0.5 for bold outline detailing, and
0.1 for small detail drawing.
It's also a good idea to buy design markers, for example, Pantone or Promarkers in a mid-grey shade for adding shadows.
References
The de Bono Group, n.d. Six Thinking Hats. [Online] Available at: http://www.debonogroup.com/six_thinking_hats.php [Accessed May 2020].