Practicing colour theory skills
Choosing a colour combination for any design project, whether it be a logo, poster, interface, etc., can be challenging when you first start working as a designer. Yet, the process can be simple and even exciting if you build on your knowledge of the colour wheel and colour theory. 
Fig 1. Pixabay (n.d.) Colour wheel
Beyond the basic colour theory, it is essential to carefully consider your client and the product you are asked to represent through your designs. This resource will help guide you through the necessary steps in choosing and applying an appropriate colour scheme to your work.
Fig 2. Pexels (n.d.) Working with colour 
Steps to creating colour combinations
Let’s take a look at a hypothetical example to explain how to choose appropriate colours for your designs.
BRIEF:
A client called 'Water Saving Solutions' has asked you to design a poster for their new anti-drip tap.
PROCESS:
Step 1: Research
You begin by researching colour palettes and searching for similar eco-based companies.
Step 2: Choose base colour
Start by deciding on one main colour that is suitable for your client's product. In this case, as it relates to water, blue would be an appropriate choice. Revisit the infographics and evaluate which would be the best colour to represent the client, product and message/concept.
Fig 3. Initial logo with the main colour: Blue
Step 3: Experiment 
Experiment with different colour combinations alongside blue. Remember to consider colour symbolism and test multiple colour schemes, evaluating each test's success in conveying the product/company's message. You may choose to combine two or even three colours if you wish.
Fig 4. Colour combination experimentation
Step 4: Test
Create a few mock-ups with different colour combinations to see how the final logo will appear online and/or printed, before choosing the final colour combination in consultation with your client.
By using your colour theory knowledge alongside the elements and principles you have now learnt how to combine colours to create a polar opposite association.