Case study Functionalism in Graphic Design: Susan Kare
But what is functionalism? 
Historically the term functionalism relates to architecture and product design and is in reference to the way buildings or everyday objects are used - so, fundamentally, their practical or utilitarian usage.
In graphic design, functionalism takes the form of practical usage of the arts in order to create clean, clearly identifiable graphical elements. These elements are universally understandable and can be used to easily enable functions, such as icons on a computer screen for example.
Functionalism takes these graphical icons and places them within an interface in order to communicate a language.
SUSAN KARE (1954 - )
Susan Kare is possibly the most well known ‘functionalist in recent history and she is best known for her interface elements and typeface contributions to the first Apple Macintosh from 1983 to 1986.
Kare is an American artist and graphic designer, specifically a computer iconographer or interface designer. She created the core visual design language that allowed users to easily navigate the first Macintosh in 1984, even if they had never used a computer before. 
Her interface icons were simple and familiar, prompting users to complete various actions to use the Macintosh without needing text. For instance, Kare’s wristwatch icon would appear when the user has to wait. Some of her other breakthrough icons, which include the smiling computer at startup, a trash can for recycling and a computer disk for saving files, are now commonplace in the digital era. 
Fig 1. Pngegg (n.d.) Susan Kare’s smiling computer icon
These icons added to Macintosh’s global appeal since it was not limited to, for example, those with proficiency in English. It also brought some humanity to the use of computers. She even did an icon that represented Steve Jobs that became wildly popular (Figure 2).
Fig 2. Openverse (n.d.)  Steve Jobs icon by Susan Kare 
She also changed various visuals to be more user-friendly and appealing, like changing the typeface to Chicago. Kare also designed the original San Francisco typeface. Arguably one of the first emojis, Cairo, was also a typeface designed by Kare for the first Macintosh operating system, with each symbol drawn by hand using the bitmap grid.
Fig 3. iStock (n.d.) Bitmap grid paper
Fig 4. Openverse (n.d.)  Original Mac fonts 
After completing her tenure at Apple Computers, Kare accepted a job offer as a designer and creative director for NeXT - Steven Jobs’ company after he left Apple - where she served clients such as Microsoft and IBM. While working at Microsoft, she created work for Windows 3.0’s, like the "baroque" wallpaper, the card deck icon for a solitaire game project, and many others. For IBM, Kare designed the icons for the Nautilus file manager for Eazel and created icons and design elements for OS/2.
In 1989, she founded LLP Susan Kare. In 2006, Facebook requested Kare to design their site's ‘Gift’ icon. She created hundreds of these virtual gift icons until 2010. Some of the icons displayed in the gift section, like "Big Kiss," is also featured in Mac OS X. Kare was hired in 2015 by Pinterest as a product design lead and went on to become their Creative Director. Kare then landed the role of Design Architect for Niantic Labs in 2021.
Susan Kare’s design philosophy focuses on simplicity. She ensures that her designs have meaning, is memorable, and are clear. She believes that the best designs are easy to understand and remember and was quoted saying that "the best icons are more like traffic signs than graphic illustrations." 
Image sources:
Source for Figure 1: Pngegg.com
Source for Figure 2: Openverse.org ("Susan Kare original MacPaint Art" by MarkGregory007 is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.)
Source for Figure 3: iStock.com
Source for Figure 4: Openverse.org (“File:Original Mac fonts.png" by The original uploader was Chmod007 at English Wikipedia. is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0)
Additional resources (Added to recommended reading)
https://www.facebook.com/commonvision/videos/susan-kare-is-a-greatly-influential-graphic-designer-who-is-best-known-for-her-i/470231637551835/
https://www.itsnicethat.com/news/susan-kare-apple-macintosh-icons-california-designing-freedom-design-museum-240517
https://lifehacker.com/im-susan-kare-graphic-designer-and-this-is-how-i-work-1646211826
https://www.typeroom.eu/susan-kare-cooper-hewitt-lifetime-achievement-award
https://vimeo.com/97583369
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4lx9Wtd2P48
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZmWOtf4Ziso