Note: this was taken from interior design - it needs to be adapted for GrD 
Stage 1: interpreting the brief
A client brief is a fundamental part of any design scheme. This is a document that allows you to understand every aspect of the client’s needs aesthetically and spatially in order to provide an appropriate design scheme. 
A client brief is compiled during a meeting with the client or may be issued in a document. The brief should determine a client's wish list, but should also take other information into consideration so that the proposed design can be developed and produced. When compiling and working with a client brief, remember that it is important to record the following information: 
The location of the property - for example, will there be issues with access?
The existing space in terms of finishes, fixed features, lighting and location of windows and doors as outlined within the site survey
Room use: for example, who will be using the room? This will affect the choices you make in terms of colour, fabrics and furniture choices
Existing location of electrical and lighting features (e.g. power outlets, lights, switches, light and sockets as outlined within your site survey)
Wish list - make a list of the items that the client has expressed they would like incorporated within the design (e.g. kitchen with island, living space with sofa bed)
Evaluating the design brief
In order to best understand the needs of our client, begin by asking important questions which will help to get a better understanding of your client’s requirements. The goal is to understand your client’s interests, tastes, pastimes, careers and other preferences, as this can help to define the look the client is hoping to achieve. 
It is a good idea to begin by making a wish list for your clients comprising all the things they would like or require. Here are some questions to consider which may help to understand your client’s requirements:
Does the client want this to be a multi-purpose space? If so, list the uses the client wants to have
Is the client planning to work from home? If so, will this be full or part time?
How many people does the space have to accommodate?
Does the client entertain family and friends?
What is the age group of the inhabitants?
Is this house for single-person occupancy with room for guests and occasional entertaining?
What is the client’s lifestyle?
Will this residence be for full-time occupation or for occasional use during a particular time of year?
Do they have any items for display? That could be paintings, glassware or artwork. Are they big readers with a large collection of books that need proper display and housing?
How many people will need to sit at one time?
Does the client want a minimalist style of decorating or do they like everything warm, cosy and slightly cluttered?
What mood do they want? Should it be formal, casual, luxurious or functional?
Are there any existing focal points?
Do the clients have a preference for certain colours, patterns, textures or materials? What do they dislike?
Will the finishes need to be robust or is it a less used space that can hold delicate or precious items?
In addition to these, designers need to fully understand the technical aspects, opportunities and limitations of the existing space in order to design a scheme which is functional and appropriate. Consider aspects such as the following: 
What is the overall size of the project in square meters and height?
Does the property enjoy good views? Where are main views?
How is the orientation to the sun? Where are south/north/east/west?
Which spaces will be brighter and warmer? Which darker and colder?
Is there a garden or any other important feature?
Are there any architectural features that will need to be enhanced or disguised? Can these be optimized?
Design styles
Your client's preferences and style will determine the design we choose for the space. Clients who let the designer make most of the decisions are extremely rare. Most of the time they will know what they want and, if not, the interior designer is there to help them find their style.
As designers, it is therefore important to understand some general interior design styles to help you establish your client’s own style and taste. This will help establish the direction your scheme might take. 
For example, your client may have a strong preference for a traditional design style or perhaps they may prefer a contemporary design scheme. It may even happen that your client has no idea of what their style preference is at all. Either way, as the designer, being able to identify and communicate design styles will help you establish your client’s preferences even if they may not initially be clear. 
Therefore, a valuable starting point for a design project is to learn a little more about each interior design style and how they differ. It is important to note that for a design project you are not restricted by a given style and you can combine more than one style.
Here are example of some common styles: 
Traditional
There is often classic opulence to this style. The use of ornate features, warm colour schemes, carved timber details and luxurious fabrics combine for a more sumptuous homey aesthetic.  Details such as crown moulding, columns, and wood-panelling are architectural features often used. 
As a traditional style can appear outdated, showing a level of restraint will ensure you avoid overwhelming the space. 
Fig 1. Example of a traditional style living room (a)
Fig 2. Example of a traditional style living room (b)
Contemporary
A contemporary design style is current, of the time and ever changing. It should not be confused with a Modern design style, which is a design style from the 1920s – 1950s.  
Fig 3. Contemporary scheme
Fig 4. Example of a Contemporary style bedroom
Fig 5. Example of a Contemporary style living room
Scandinavian
A Scandinavian design style, originating from Nordic countries, is a simple style with a focus on light, spacious and comfortable interiors. Schemes focus primarily on the use of light-coloured walls and the incorporation of natural elements such as timbers, furs, woven and knitted materials. There is a real feeling of calmness and comfort within these schemes without overcomplicating the space. 
Fig 6. Example of a Scandinavian style living room (a)
Fig 7. Example of a Scandinavian style living room (b)
Modern
A Modern design style is different from a contemporary design style. Modern design spanned the period from the 1920s – 1950s, and is characterised by a lack of clutter, open plan spaces with a focus on functionality and a truth to materials. Iconic furniture pieces are incorporated into these scheme and pops of colour are incorporated against a more paired down backdrop. 
Fig 8. Example of a modern style kitchen
Fig 9. Example of a modern style living room
Bohemian
A bohemian design style is a collection of everything from vintage furniture and light fixtures to various different accessories. This is a mix that can combine and blend more than one style. For example: a traditional item of furniture with an antique light fixture. This style can be difficult to successfully master and can therefore appear cluttered. 
Fig 10. Example of a bohemian style bedroom
Fig 11. Example of a bohemian style living room
Industrial
Industrial design styles take inspiration from commercial spaces instead of a residential interiors. There is usually a more neutral colour palette with predominantly raw materials visible such as exposed brickwork and wiring. 
Fig 12. Example of an Industrial style living room
Fig 13. Example of an Industrial style loft
Organic 
When simply chosen as a style preference, organic design may be introduced through the selection natural elements either actual or implied. Natural stone floors, furnishings and cabinets crafted from untreated woods and sisal-based textiles all have organic characteristics appropriate to the style.
Some people who choose organic design do not use animal fur, leather, exotic, non-renewable woods, synthetic fabrics or chemically-laden materials.
Simply defined, organic design is that which utilizes natural elements to create interiors that are at once aesthetic, functional and without materials that are contrived or excessively manufactured.
Deconstructed 
As with organic design, deconstructed design is choice that may be made based on eco-responsibility as well as personal style. As the name implies, deconstructed design is that which has been taken apart to either show the origin of the components or that which uses the components of the origin in order to create an entirely new element or object.
Brought to public attention during the 1980s, largely through the Museum of Modern Art Deconstructivist Architecture exhibition in New York, the term encompasses a general trend in architecture and design.
The style is an effective aesthetic in French industrial and urban design projects.
Fig 14. The Pompidou Centre in Paris
The Pompidou Centre in Paris designed by the architecture firm Piano & Rogers is a great example for deconstruction architecture of the 1980s high-tech architectural style.
All service shafts and all construction elements like steel beams and ducting as well as ventilation shafts and elevators are exposed on the outside of the building instead of being hidden within the walls and floors.
Style and fashion are not the same
Having now looked at a variety of design styles, keep in mind that style and fashion are two entirely different things. Just because something is popular and being promoted by various manufacturing companies and shops doesn’t mean that that style is suitable for the house you are working on. It is important to keep in mind not to ignore the existing architectural style and layout of a space when designing the interior. 
The above list of design styles discussed is not an exhaustive list so add to this list as you come across additional design styles during your research. 
Budget considerations 
The ability to work within a particular budget is vital in meeting the needs of the client and satisfying their expectations. Even though you may not be working to a specific figure, you may be tasked with working to a budget range. 
A lower range budget might consist of FF&E (furniture, fixtures and equipment) comprising of mostly off-the-shelf items. These items are ready-made and bought in-store or online from popular brands, such as Ikea. For example, you might source a pack of ready-made drapes and roller blind in-store and install these rather than have drapes and a roller blind specifically made for the project. 
A mid-range budget consists of a mix of ready-made items as well as custom and designer goods. Here you might combine off-the shelf items with custom designed items. For example, you might source and specify a particular fabric for the project and have drapes made specifically for the space; however, you might still source ready-made roller blinds to compliment the custom drapes. 
A higher-range budget consists mostly of bespoke and designer goods. Here the focus is more on custom-made pieces and sourcing pieces from high-end stores. The cost here is significantly higher and a designer might spare no expense in sourcing high-end fabrics to have both the drapes and the blinds custom made specifically for the space.