Taking responsibility for own personal and professional development
To find employment or to assess the viability of setting up a graphic design business on your own, it makes sense to make a career plan or a personal development plan that outlines your future goals (e.g. for the next 3-5 years). A set plan will help you to stay focused on achieving your goal. The first step is to assess your current status and ask yourself:
What are your Strengths?
What are your Weaknesses?
What are the Opportunities?
What are the Threats?
This SWOT analysis will allow you to look objectively at your current situation and generate a framework, and by breaking down each point, you can create more structured plans concerning your future development. For example, you can start by deciding whether you want to specialise in a certain design area where you may already have great skills and knowledge, or you can actively look for professional development workshops or training in the areas where you need to grow.
By analysing your strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats, you can determine whether or not your chosen specialist field is a viable option for you or whether the threats or weaknesses outweigh the opportunities and your strengths.
Fig 1. iStock (2023) SWOT analysis
Once you have established an area you would like to work in, it's time to set some goals. Perhaps you want to find employment within the web design or print production industry. A more detailed plan will help you to stay focused and reach the goal you set for yourself. Your action plan should specify dates on which you intend to complete certain tasks. This could include:
CV & portfolio completion (include a date)
Potential employers' research (include a date)
Job applications sent (include a date)
The plan should also include review dates. For example, if you are unsuccessful in achieving a goal or completing a task by a certain date, you can review your approach, establish why you have not achieved the goal and create a new action plan.
Implementing and reviewing your personal and professional development plan
It is important to keep learning and developing your knowledge of graphic design and your specialised area as well as monitoring your personal development. A SWOT analysis can help you with this by producing development and career plans and setting targets. However, external influences are also worth considering since it can significantly affect your planning. For instance, a graphic designer solely working with 2D print media would probably need to expand their knowledge and skill set to include digital design outcomes, as well as 3D printing. This way a designer can keep up with modern day demands and the development of printing technologies. 
This means you must keep reviewing your development plans to establish whether or not they are still relevant. This should be done regularly and not only when forced due to external influences. In order to remain current in an ever-changing industry, reconsider your weaknesses, adjust your threats and opportunities, and rediscover your strengths. 
Implementing career and development plans is only useful if they are reviewed and assessed regularly. This will allow your development to progress naturally without being restricted by previously set targets.