Importance Of Photography 
High-quality photographs are essential to graphic design, but high-quality original pictures make for exceptional designs. Stock photos, albeit functional, get recycled by numerous designers, and they start can start to lose their impact. They sometimes also don’t deliver what you need for a particular project, which is where a photographer comes in. 
Even though you might not be required to take the actual photos for the designs, it is essential to have a clear concept of what you need for a project and what you want to convey to work alongside the photographer to capture the best possible image for your design.
Fig 2. Pixabay (n.d.) Setup for a photography shoot
A background in photography, or even some rudimentary knowledge, can help you immensely in this journey. It is worth scratching up on composition rules (e.g., rule of thirds, filling the frame, using diagonal lines, balance, etc.), lighting, exposure, colour, and so forth to contribute your ‘voice’ to a photography shoot and influence the result. 
For example, the rule of thirds states that the point of interest in a design should be placed on one of the line intersections dividing the image into nine equal rectangles. So, placing your main subject (i.e., person, product, building, etc.) in a specific third within the design space like in the examples below:
Fig 4. Pixabay (n.d.)  Example of the rule of thirds applied to a composition - visual weight in the bottom third
Fig 5. Pixabay (n.d.) Another example of the rule of thirds applied to the composition - visual weight on the right
It goes without saying that you should always aim to create and use photographs or images that are 
Sharp
Clear
Distinct
Memorable
Even after you have captured the image you need, a lot of time goes into the final edits of the photographs you will use in your graphic design. Modifications can be done to enhance your specific design, but that means nothing if you haven’t got the right subject, angle, composition, etc. You can edit a photo with enhancements that include:
Cropping an image to clean it up
Adjusting a photo’s white balance
Adjusting a photo’s exposure and contrast
Adjusting a photo’s colour vibrancy and saturation
Finalising and sharing your photo in an appropriate format
Fig 6. Pexels (n.d.) Photo editing
Since photography goes hand-in-hand with design, it makes sense that you should be the one directing or even conducting a shoot. It would thus be ideal if you even gave it a go at taking photographs yourself. It gives you a lot more control over the product. Even if you are inexperienced, start by familiarising yourself with the basics, plan your shoot, capture the right visual for your design, and always remember the intention or purpose that the image will play in your design.