Ideas Generation
Idea generation refers to the process in which designers create or produce work in response to a problem, project, or task. While generating new ideas can be challenging, it is a vital part of the creative design cycle and an important skill to practise and develop in order to maintain longevity in any creative field. 
Fig 1. Pixabay (n.d.) Ideation is a key step in design
All designers must hone their ability to experiment, explore and develop new ideas. The critical thing to discover for yourself is the creative thinking techniques that work for you as an individual.  Many creative people have an intuitive sense of developing innovative ideas so it may seem unnecessary to call special attention to idea generation techniques if you are naturally creative. But even for the most instinctively creative among us, it is vital to practise and develop the skill to employ techniques for generating ideas.
There are several methods used for idea generation. We will introduce a few in this article, but as you continue to practise and develop your creativity, be willing to experiment and explore different techniques to help you generate ideas. Some methods will be more effective than others, but ultimately their effectiveness will depend on the nature of the person utilising them.
Brainstorming 
Brainstorming is the utilisation of a sketchpad and a pen/pencil to quickly jot down ideas based on an outlined brief or task. It enables a designer or group of individuals to quickly break down and evaluate the key points within the brief/task.
Fig 2. Pixabay (n.d.) Mind mapping/brainstorming
Generally, in the initial stages of idea generation a graphic designer will begin by brainstorming and mind mapping. This approach begins with breaking down a brief or task into its key objectives and then following the ideas that spring out of these objectives. 
Next, the team or individual whom the task has been assigned to, will pull out these objectives and create initial ideas, often by sketching but also by the addition of research and collage to create an overall style or theme that fulfils the brief.
WHAT is required? 
HOW will it be produced? 
WHEN does the work need to be completed? 
WHO needs to help in its production? 
WHY is it being produced, what is the aim of the piece of work? 
WHERE is the piece going to be shown?
Fig 3. Pixabay (n.d.) Brainstorming can be done through visuals and/or writing

Sketching
Sketching is a hugely useful tool in a graphic designers armoury. It can be an extremely quick way (especially compared to CAD) to get simplistic versions of designs or layouts down on paper. If done accurately, sketching can enable an individual to work alongside other members of the team to quickly plot out an idea in a clearly legible manner. 
Fig 4. Unsplash (n.d.) Initial sketches of ideas

Sketching is less accurate than using CAD but it is quicker and more ‘free’ meaning there is more room for trial and error. This encourages other team members to experiment more freely and quickly as a collaborative.
Collage
Collage is another way of generating ideas. It is the art of sticking or combining various materials such as photography or pieces/sections of paper, card or fabric to create a composition.
Fig 5. Unsplash (n.d.) Collage
In a design ideation/experimentation context, collage can help to create a mood board based around a brief or task. It can include colours, styles, typography and general inspiration that may influence the final design piece.
The good, the bad and the ugly
An additional technique you might explore is simple but effective in allowing you to move beyond your initial ideas. The good, the bad and the ugly is used to record three of your more instinctual ideas. 
The good – write down your best idea. This is the idea that does not care about practical concerns or budgetary concerns. Essentially, this is the idea that you would pursue if there were no further challenges
The bad – write down your worst idea. This is the idea that explores all the possibilities that should not be pursued because it solves the problem poorly or without consideration for any realistic concerns
The ugly – write down the ugly idea. This is sometimes a boring idea. What is the idea that solves the problem but with no creativity or innovation?
Fig 6. Unsplash (n.d.) Record good, bad, and ugly ideas
What this technique accomplishes is that it frees your mind to release some of these more instinctual ideas. Writing these ideas down means they no longer occupy your headspace. Instead, you are left with a clear mind that can begin exploring the ideas that are likely somewhere between the good, the bad, and the ugly.