Colour Wheel
Colour Frequency and Vibration
Like sound waves, light rays have varying wavelengths, or frequencies: the lighter the colour, the higher the frequency. These wavelengths determine perception of colour.
Some pigments absorb certain light frequencies and reflect others. We see the reflected frequencies as colour. Complementary colours, such as red and green, are not readily legible. They have similar black and white value, so their wavelengths set up a vibration. Any combination of colours of similar value, even without vibrating, will have low visibility. Although yellow and purple are complementary colours, they have strong contrast in value and therefore, little vibration. They provide maximum visibility.
Colour Temperature
Colours are also divided into categories by temperature feel. These are considered cool and warm colours.
The cool colours are green, blue and violet, while warm colours are red orange and yellow. Psychologically, the colours give the viewer the feeling of these temperatures.
Colour Schemes
Related Schemes
This colour scheme uses a single hue. (Example: red and its varying tints and shades)
Analogous – The scheme uses adjacent hues. (Example: red, red-orange, and red-violet)
Complementary – If two hues are opposite each other on the colour wheel, they are considered to be complementary colours.
When used together in a design, they make each other seem brighter and more intense. This is not always a good thing, however, as colours, such as red and green, tend to make each other too intense and vibrate against each other. This can make for difficult reading.
Triadic – This scheme also uses three colours. They are evenly spaced from each other.
Tetrad – This scheme uses four colours evenly spaced on the colour wheel. A primary, secondary and two tertiary colours are used.
Alternate Complement – This scheme uses four colours: a triad and a complement to one of the hues.
Colour psychology and emotional associations
Red
Red makes you feel passionate and energized.
Red is the warmest and most dynamic of the colours—it triggers opposing emotions. It is often associated with passion and love as well as anger and danger.
It can increase a person’s heart rate and make them excited.
If you want to draw attention to a design element, use red. But use it as an accent colour in moderation as it can be overwhelming.
Orange
Orange makes you feel energized and enthusiastic.
Orange enhances a feeling of vitality and happiness. Like red, it draws attention and shows movement but is not as overpowering. It is aggressive but balanced — it portrays energy yet can be inviting and friendly. Orange is great for a call to action to buy or subscribe to a product.
Yellow
Yellow makes you feel happy and spontaneous.
Yellow is perhaps the most energetic of the warm colours. It is associated with laughter, hope and sunshine. Accents of yellow help give your design energy and will make the viewer feel optimistic and cheerful. However, yellow tends to reflect more light and can irritate a person’s eyes. Too much yellow can be overwhelming and should be used sparingly. In design, it is often used to grab attention in an energetic and comforting way.
Green
Green makes you feel optimistic and refreshed.
Green symbolizes health, new beginnings and wealth. Green is the easiest on the eyes and should be used to relax and create balance in a design. It is a great colour to use if a company wants to depict growth, security or inspire possibility. Green can also feel calming and relaxing.
Blue
Blue makes you feel safe and relaxed.
Blue evokes feelings of calmness and spirituality as well as security and trust. Seeing the colour blue causes the body to create chemicals that are calming. It is no surprise that it’s the most favoured of the colours. Dark blues are great for corporate designs because it helps give a professional feel, but using too much can create a cold, disengaged feeling. Light blues give a more relaxing, friendly feel. Great examples are social sites like Facebook and Twitter who use lighter blues.
Purple
Purple makes you feel creative.
Purple is associated with mystery, creativity, royalty and wealth. Lighter shades of purple are often used to soothe or calm a viewer, hence why it is used in beauty products. Incorporate purple to make a design look more luxurious and wealthy or a lighter purple to show romance and mystery.
Pink
Pink makes you feel playful and romantic.
Pink represents femininity and romance, sensitivity and tenderness. It’s inherently sweet, cute and charming.
Brown
Brown makes you feel down to earth.
Brown creates a sense of stability and support. It’s warm and friendly, practical and dependable, and can also represent the old fashioned and well established.
Black
Black feels sophisticated and serious.
Black evokes power, luxury, elegance, professionalism and simplicity. It’s bold, powerful and a little mysterious. But black can have some negative connotations—it’s the colour of mourning, fear and sadness and it can feel intimidating and unapproachable as well.
White
White makes you feel pure, fresh and clean.
White evokes purity and innocence and creates a minimalist aesthetic. It can be very simple, clean and modern. It’s also the most neutral colour of all.
Grey
Grey feels serious and professional.
Grey is a more mature, responsible colour. Its positive connotations include formality and dependability, while the negative side can mean being overly conservative, conventional and lacking in emotion. It’s safe and quite subdued, serious and reserved.
Brand and industry
As you can see in this chart, many popular companies have used colour psychology in marketing to evoke a particular emotion in their customers
Customers also form colour associations for certain industries, such as blue for tech, green for health, and red for fast food. While some companies choose to match customer expectations by using their industry’s common colours, others have found that going against the grain can be a very effective way to make an impression.