Graphic design is a fast-paced environment that is constantly changing. New design trends, technological developments, and regulations will continuously impact Graphic Designers and it is therefore essential to keep up to date with new developments within the industry.
To stay current on graphic design developments, you will constantly find yourself researching topics relevant to your field. 
Research
Throughout your career as a graphic designer, you will spend a lot of time researching and developing ideas for different projects. Here are some examples of different types of research: 
Primary research 
Primary research is classified as research that is physically conducted by the graphic designer themself. This is research that is carried out through a variety of methods in order to understand more about a particular topic. 
Examples of primary research: 
Visiting showrooms, design fairs, etc. and taking notes and photographs
Conducting interviews, e.g. asking your client questions to gather the necessary data and ensuring you understand all their design needs
Contextual observation, e.g. observing users in a particular space
Handing out questionnaires to conduct market research
Discussing a topic with someone like an industry specialist or colleague
Usability testing, i.e. sharing a prototype with a focus group to gather feedback
Fig 1. Interviewing a client
Secondary research
Unlike primary research, where you physically carry out the research yourself, secondary research relies on researching existing sources. Here, you are relying on another person’s content to inform your own understanding of a topic. This is quite commonly used as it is often much quicker than conducting primary research. 
Examples of secondary research: 
Researching on the internet
Reading articles, blogs and podcasts, and referring to magazines (e.g., Design week, Creative review, and Icon) and books
Fig 2. Secondary research
Effective research
The objective of all learning is to improve your abilities. To achieve improvement and to maintain the knowledge you have gained, learning needs to be planned effectively, organised, assessed and evaluated. Below are tips to help you plan your approach to ensure you are effective with your research and learning: 
We learn by setting professional goals. For example, a goal might be to learn everything involved in creating a brand style guide using CAD. Since there are many factors involved, you have to plan where you are going to get your information from, what information is needed and when you need to complete the research.
You need to organise your research and learning. Ask yourself what online sources are available? Is Google enough or is it necessary to consult with other industry experts to get more information? Can this be done through tutorials online or meeting with a colleague in-person? Perhaps you need to gather and review examples of brand style guides? 
Assessing your learning or the research conducted also means evaluating what you have found. Ask yourself is the information relevant? Is the information current? Is the information source reliable? Is this all I need to know? Are there other sources or avenues I have not considered?
There is a considerable amount of information available, and evaluating the research you conduct constantly will allow you to use your time more efficiently. This is a skill that you will develop and will improve with practice.
Practical tips
Here are some tips to consider when conducting research: 
When researching online, be specific with your search terms. This will save you time. For example, if you are trying to find inspirational imagery to do with the design of an outdoor clothing company logo, search for “Outdoor clothing design logos” rather than “logos”.
Ensure you make use of reliable sources. For example, if interviewing someone, ensure they have experience in the field you are researching. 
When conducting online research, make use of reputable sources. Note: Wikipedia is not deemed a reputable academic source and you are not always guaranteed that the information supplied is from a subject specialist.
Fig 3. The CRAAP test is one way to check quality of sources 
Document and save relevant information from each source you have consulted. This will come in handy when you need to reference your work. Note: correctly citing and referencing your work is a vital part of your course. 
Don’t be afraid to combine a variety of methods of research (i.e. making use of both primary and secondary sources). This helps to deepen your understanding.