A Guide to Critical Analysis
What Critical Analysis is
Critical analysis is studying someone’s work (a design, a photograph, a painting, a book, a movie, etc.) in order to better understand it. It is a way of finding the deeper meaning and purpose of a work (or series of works) and judging how successful or unsuccessful it is. Critical analysis is a skill that can be developed with practice and it can (and should) be applied to your own creative work.
Below we will discuss how to critically analyse someone’s work and how to apply these techniques to critically analyse your own work. 
Why do we do it?
Critical analysis is an important part of developing creativity. Artists and designers learn to critique the work of others in order to understand how different techniques and skills can be applied. It can help inspire you for your own projects by building a deep understanding of what has been done by professionals in the past. Learning how to critique work means that you can be generous with your feedback and offer suggestions on how a piece of work can be further improved.
Finally, learning how to critically analyse the work of others helps artists and designers to be more objective about the strengths and weaknesses of their own creative practice.
What Critical Analysis is not
Description:
Describing the different elements of a piece of work or describing the background of an artist or a designer is a good start because it means that you are collecting necessary information. However, this is not critical analysis.
Criticism:
The ‘critical’ part of critical analysis does not mean that you must be negative about the work. It is not about looking for flaws, stating that a work is bad or saying something cruel about an artist or designer. Instead, you need to take an objective standpoint and give evidence-based reasons why you think something works well or does not work well. 
Stating a personal opinion:
Take a look at the image below (Fig. 1):
 
Fig 1. Van Gogh (1889) The Starry Night [oil on canvas]
 
Now, read the following two statements:
1.      ‘I like the painting because it uses a lot of blue. The swirling lines are also very interesting. I think he is a good painter because of this.’
 
2.      ‘The artist uses thick brushstrokes and contrasting colours to create an exaggerated style, which demonstrates his skill in oil painting. In letters he wrote to his sister from the French countryside, Van Gogh (1888) talked about his fascination with the night sky and the intensity of its colours. The bright blue, yellow and dark green tones ask the viewer to pay attention to the beauty of the evening light.’ 
The first statement is a personal opinion. It uses words like ‘I like’ and ‘I think’. It does not explain why blue colours and swirling lines are important or how they demonstrate Van Gogh’s skills as an artist. Also, it does not give any evidence to support the argument.
The second statement is a critical analysis because:
It studies different techniques and considers why they were used
 It looks at the context of the painting (i.e. the French countryside and his fascination with the night sky)
It gives evidence explaining what the artist wanted to say through the painting (the letters to his sister)
It synthesises information about technique and context to make a final argument
 
How to Critically Analyse 
While there are many approaches you could take, below is a suggested step-by-step process to critically analyse someone’s work (e.g. a sculpture, a photograph, a design or finished design project).
1. Find an angle for analysis
This will give you a starting point for your research. Begin by exploring a question or a statement about the artwork/design. It will also help you to break down the process and create some structure which can help make the approach seem less overwhelming.
Your question or statement can come from an assignment. For example, you may be asked to write an essay examining key ideas from the Bauhaus movement and how it influenced designers and artists from the early 20th century to today. 
It can also be based on something that you would like to investigate further. Perhaps you want to know if new technologies are essential for creating cutting edge art and design for example. You could critically analyse a range of contemporary works to find an answer to your question. 
2. Research
This is an important step. It involves reading books, articles, websites, videos and looking at other images that are related to the design/artwork you are analysing.
The aim of your research is to get a strong understanding of:
The techniques and skills used by the designer/artist
Theories and arguments that exist about the design/artwork
How the design/artwork reflects the designer/artist’s other work and overall practice and development
How the design/artwork influenced the work of other artists and designers
Context - how it influenced the designer/artist and the purpose and meaning of the design/artwork. This includes:
o   The designer/artist’s personal and professional background
o   Social, economic, political, cultural and/or technical issues surrounding the work
o   Any movement the designer/artist was a part of or influenced by
o   Any controversy that surrounded the work
This step can take a lot of time but it is very important to carry out as it will inform how you will develop your own ideas and arguments for your critical analysis. It is also how you will collect evidence to back up your observations and analysis. 
Remember to constantly collect your citing and referencing sources as you go through this step. It is much more difficult to go back and look for this information later when you write up your analysis.
3. Examine different parts of the work to identify its purpose and meaning
Now it is time to take a closer look at the design/artwork itself. Designers/artists make deliberate choices about structure, colour, shape, form, texture, materials, lighting and they employ different techniques in order to create a particular effect and achieve their goals.
To analyse a work, you need to:
Look at all the different parts of it and ask why the designer/artist used particular techniques, colours, styles etc.
Consider the background information you have researched and how it helps to explain the choices the designer/artist made
Explore the theme or topic of the work
Explore any theories or arguments that exist about the work and the techniques used
Examine the strengths and weaknesses of the work
Analyse how successful or unsuccessful you believe the work was in meeting the designer/artist’s goals
4. Compare the work to others
Another useful step is to compare the work to others. This can include designs/artworks by:
 The same designer/artist
Different designers/artists that influenced the work
Different designers/artists that were influenced by the work
Designs/artworks that share the same theme as the work you are analysing or that use similar techniques
5. Construct an argument, synthesise information and draw conclusions
This is where you put all your research and analysis together and write up a final set of arguments about the work. Then you will reach conclusions. The goal is to make a set of judgements about the work by building on the evidence you have collected in steps 2 and 3. Your judgments should be focused on the question or statement you identified in step 1.
To complete your critical analysis you will need to:
Put all your evidence, ideas and opinions together to form your judgements about the work. This is known as synthesis
Create a structure for your critical analysis so that all your arguments and evidence are presented in a logical manner
Draw conclusions about the work by writing a few sentences that answer the question you asked or that responds to the statement you posed in step 1
Example 1: “Keep Calm And Carry On” Poster 
Below is a short critical analysis of the “Keep Calm And Carry On” poster that was released in Britain in 1939. The analysis was created using the above step-by-step approach. Read through it carefully. You will see that it includes:
 An angle for analysis: A timeless, cultural icon or an oversimplified, commercialised design? 
Uses secondary research to provide context and evidence for the arguments it makes
Examines different elements of the design
Compares the design to other works
Synthesises information to analyse the design
Fig 2.  Keep calm and carry on (1939) by UK Department of Information 
The “Keep Calm and Carry On” poster is an historically significant piece of WWII propaganda that has become a cultural icon. The poster is celebrated for its simplicity and timeless message of resilience, aimed at keeping morale up and informing the British public to remain calm and seek refuge. However, research conducted by historian, Dr Rebecca Lewis, shows that it was actually never seen in public during this time (Review, 2018). Instead, it was kept in reserve only to be used if Britain was invaded. After the war the entire series of posters was pulped, with only a few copies left in existence. The poster was first mass-produced in 2008.
The design has faced criticism for its oversimplification, commercialisation, and potential to promote passivity. Its interpretations differ depending on who you ask and its cultural impact remains a subject of ongoing debate and discussion.
Commissioned by the UK Ministry of Information, the ‘Keep Calm and Carry On’ poster was published in 1939 as a motivational message in preparation for WWII. It combined the talents of speechwriter, A.P. Waterfield, and graphic designer, Ernest Wallcousins, to become a well-known poster design, despite being forgotten for over 60 years.
The brief for the poster was as follows:
The design had to stand out among other posters 
It had to be unique and visually pleasing 
Bear a distinctive symbol that would be difficult or impossible for the enemy to reproduce
(Prisco, 2017)
At the time, the poster checked all these boxes. Since then, it has surpassed any previous expectations for its influence and reach and established itself as one of the most recognisable graphic designs worldwide. “As a logo, it was nearly as recognisable as Coca-Cola or Apple…And, unlike most memes, it has been astonishingly enduring, a canvas onto which practically anything can be projected while retaining a sense of ironic reassurance. It is the ruling emblem of an era that is increasingly defined by austerity nostalgia.” (Hatherley, 2022).
The strength of the ‘Keep Calm and Carry On’ poster lies in its simplicity. The bold design, with its bright red (or at times blue) background, white Sans Serif type, and straightforward message are easily understood and memorable. This was intentional as the design was supposed to offer people a sense of reassurance and guidance during times of crisis. 
Other propaganda posters that were designed to provide encouragement during WWII made use of the same simplistic typeface and prominent red colour, but they weren’t as successful in their longevity, popularity, or bringing people a sense of hope and reassurance. In fact, the subject matter (e.g. Fig 3. two Nazi soldiers with skull-like facial features and bulging eyes) evokes quite the opposite feelings. Its horror style represents fear, anxiety, and a reminder of perpetual aggression and violence.
Fig 3. 'We beat 'em before. We'll beat 'em again' poster from the UK National Archives (1939-1946)
Unfortunately, the widespread commercialisation of the "Keep Calm and Carry On" poster, with countless adaptations and parodies, has diluted its original meaning and significance. Some argue that it has become a cliché, often used inappropriately, and that its “relentless repetition has evaporated any charm it had once possessed.” (Marsden, 2013). Critics suggest that the poster's message oversimplifies complex issues. It encourages people to "carry on" without addressing the root causes of problems or encouraging critical thinking or action. There have been instances of the poster being used insensitively in the wake of disasters or tragedies, which critics argue is a misuse of its original intent.
Supporters of the "Keep Calm and Carry On" poster argue that its message has been a source of strength and comfort for many during difficult times, providing a sense of continuity and stability. For example, the poster was made a global sensation by the 2009 financial crisis in America. “The message had found its purpose; not as a call to order in the wake of a Nazi invasion, but as a quirky encouragement in the face of economic disaster.” (Prisco, 2017) It also made a massive return to the forefront during the 2020-2021 Covid-19 pandemic.
The poster has proven its worth, time and time again, especially over the course of the last decade, and it doesn’t seem to be losing momentum. The effectiveness of the design lies in the fact that it:
Has a message that is timeless 
Has historical significance 
Is simple and memorable
Is adaptable
Evokes nostalgia
Is inherently positive and encouraging
Provides some with psychological comfort
Love it or hate it, as a graphic design the"Keep Calm and Carry On" poster has attracted global attention - which is a success story in itself - and is therefore worthy of being considered a cultural icon. 
 
Critically Analysing Your Own Work
Critical analysis can be applied to your own work, as well as to the work of others. This can often be referred to as reflective practice and is in fact a very important skill to learn in order to develop your creativity. Critically analysing your own projects will give you a deeper understanding of your strengths and weaknesses and will allow you to create a plan to improve your creative practice.
To analyse your own work, follow a process similar to the step-by-step approach used to analyse someone else's work. This includes:
1. Finding an angle for analysis
This means thinking about why you created the work and what you intended to achieve. For example:
If you were given a client brief you might want to focus on how well your work meets your client’s needs
If you created the work for an exhibition you might want to focus on the themes and how well your finished work expressed particular ideas to an audience
Your angle of analysis will inform the other steps you will take to critically analyse your own work. 
2. Researching and examining your own work
Here, you will:
Reflect on the technical/design/aesthetic choices you made
Review your creative process and how it worked (or did not work) in meeting your goals
Application: Assess your skills and the techniques used to produce the work. How well did they work? Is there anything you could have done differently?
Examine the quality of your finished project outcomes
3. Evaluating your influences
In this step, you will reflect on anything that influenced your finished work and explore how the work was influenced. This can include (but is not limited to): 
An art and design movement
Specific works of art and design
Other creatives working in industry today or in the past
 A specific theme or topic
 A social, economic, political or environmental issue
 New technology
4. Constructing an argument, synthesising information and reflecting on outcomes
This is the final step. Here you will make a judgement about your finished work. To do this you can consider the following questions:
What worked well, what did not work well and why?
Is the purpose of your work clear to the audience or client? 
Did your work meet your creative goals or the needs in the client brief? 
How does your work ‘fit’ within your area of creative practice e.g. a movement, a style, an ethos, etc.?
What are the strengths and weaknesses in your creative practice? Are there any techniques or skills you need to improve on? 	
Has the process and finished work given you inspiration for future creative ideas?
The importance of feedback and reflection
Sometimes it can be difficult to look at your own work objectively. After spending a lot of time on a project, it can be hard to identify its weaknesses and you may not want to admit that there is still more work to be done. This is why getting constructive feedback from people you trust is so important.  
Such feedback will help you to:
Understand strengths and weaknesses in your work
Identify context
Know if the meaning and purpose of your work is clear to an audience
Understand how your work is influenced by contemporary art and design practice
Create a plan to improve your work and develop your creative practice
When looking for feedback:
Ask people who can give you an honest opinion about your work. Those with experience in critical analysis and/or with an interest in art and design would be ideal
Don’t simply ask reviewers if they like your work. Instead ask detailed questions about what they believe the strengths and weaknesses are and why? You can also ask about a theme or a specific technical choice you made
Reflect on the feedback you receive in order to critically analyse your own work
Example 2: Student’s Own Work - Theatre Poster for Romeo & Juliet 
Fig. 4 shows a theatre poster created by a student for Romeo & Juliet. 
Below is a critical analysis of their own work that follows the step by step approach as explained above. Read through it carefully. You will see that it includes:
 An angle for analysis – the student’s goal was to create a poster concept that was different to the typical representation of Romeo & Juliet in play/movie advertising 
Research - themes, moods, styling choices, technical choices, processes and skills were examined
Influences - the student considered the different influences on the work
Reflecting on outcomes - the student made judgements about their work and creative process
Fig 4: Student’s own work (2018) Theatre Poster for Romeo and Juliet.
‘The client is a local theatre company who are putting on a production of ‘CAPULET’ – a re-imaging of Romeo and Juliet - in the next few months. They wanted an eye-catching image to advertise the show. This image will be used for the main poster, flyers, emails and as a cover for the programme.
 
My goal was to create an image different to typical representations in movie and theatre advertising. Campaigns normally focus on the relationship between the central characters, in a historical or contemporary setting (e.g. Zeffirelli’s (1968) or Luhrmann’s (1996) adaptations). I wanted to create a sense of ‘otherworldliness’ by capturing a ‘sci-fi’ mood and using styling reminiscent of retro science fiction movie advertising from the 1960’s and 1980’s.
 
The final image is visually striking and clearly reflects the classic story of Romeo and Juliet. The ‘Retro Future’ style is created through the use of graphics in the title and tagline, and in the ‘outer space’ background. This effect is unexpected and not typically associated with Shakespeare’s work. Rather than follow a typical image of a young couple in love, the final poster shows Juliet alone, isolated in space, at the point of her suicide. It emphasises the play as it is – more tragedy than love story. The floating effect and blood red styling of the model’s dress adds to the theme and emphasises an ‘otherworldliness’, telling the viewer that this is not simply ‘Romeo and Juliet’ but a re-imagining of the play.   
 
A key element to this concept is the portrayal of Juliet having a regal elegance, combined with the effect of floating in air. It evokes a sense of stillness and aligns floating with a silence in death. The pose is tense but has a softness and femininity to it as Juliet is poised to strike herself with the weapon. A sense of “peaking" energy is intended, raising tension and expectation to capture this final moment of life.
 
The composition provided technical challenges. The photoshoot wasn’t carried out in a professional studio, which would have been preferable. However, the lighting was reasonably achieved and only minor adjustments in post-processing were needed. The model was ideally suited to creating the dramatic poses needed. It was physically difficult to maintain balance and poise required to create the floating effect. Photoshop was used for compositing and accommodating the presentation titles.  After first applying the final image onto the composite background with text, the immediate impact I had was that of being able to visualise the billboard in
“reality”. Technical aspects aside, the impact took a high importance in the brief, and as such I think it was achieved.
 
Lots of planning was carried out prior to the shoot, with a lot of engagement with the model including creative discussions regarding posing, hair, makeup etc. and this reduced the duration of the actual shoot. In hindsight, planning additional time would have been beneficial to allow for additional creative variations in shots and perspectives, and to improve general comfort conditions during the shoot (for breaks, food etc). I think that I could have engaged more with the assistant in terms of shoot times, travel and concept briefing so that requirements were understood more thoroughly.
 
In creating the flowing fabric effect, I had an assistant on one side, and I on the other. Timing of the shot was trial and error, and coordinating remote shooting was difficult and temperamental. An additional assistant would have been more appropriate, to allow me to ensure focus was maintained across shots (e.g. watching model position changes). Although the concept didn't specifically include Romeo, his presence or even implied presence may have provided an additional link or connection to the story. On a final note, I certainly gained an appreciation of the complexities of compositing techniques, and as such is an area requiring appropriate specialism.’
 
References:
Delius, P., et. al, (2006) Architecture in Focus: Frank Lloyd Wright. Könemann.
 
Drew, P. (2004) Sydney Opera House: Jørn Utzon. Phaidon Press Ltd., London, United Kingdom.
Guggenheim Museum (1959 and 2016) Explore the Building: Selected Images Available at: https://www.guggenheim.org/the-frank-lloyd-wright-building#buildinghistory [accessed 31st May 2019]
Hatherley, O. (2022) 'Keep Calm and Carry On – the sinister message behind the slogan that seduced the nation,' The Guardian, 19 October. https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/08/keep-calm-and-carry-on-posters-austerity-ubiquity-sinister-implications.
Marsden, R. (2013) 'How long can the ‘Keep Calm’ trend carry on? | The Independent,' The Independent, 25 May. https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/this-britain/how-long-can-the-keep-calm-trend-carry-on-8627557.html.
Miller, A., (2009). The Guggenheim: Frank Lloyd Wright and the Making of the
Modern Museum. Thames & Hudson, Ltd., London, United Kingdom.
 
Prisco, J. (2017) Keep calm: The story behind the UK’s most famous poster design. Edited by CNN. https://edition.cnn.com/style/article/keep-calm-poster/index.html
(Accessed: September 22, 2023).
Review, C. (2018) '12: HM Gov. (1939) – Keep calm and carry on,' Creative Review, 15 November. https://www.creativereview.co.uk/keep-calm-and-carry-on/.
Romeo & Juliet (1968) [film poster] Directed by F. Zeffirelli, Produced by J. Brabourne. 
Romeo & Juliet (1996) [film poster] Directed by B. Luhrmann, Produced by B. Luhrmann and G. Martinelli. 
Van Gogh, V. (1889) The Starry Night [oil on canvas] Metropolitan Museum of Modern Art: New York. Available at : https://www.moma.org/learn/moma_learning/vincent-van-gogh-the-starry-night-1889/ [accessed 20th May 2019]
Van Gogh, V. (1888) Letter to his sister, Willemien No. 678 Available at: http://www.vangoghletters.org/vg/letters/let678/letter.html [accessed 21st May 2019].