	
Lecture: Condensed History of Typography
A Brief History of Typography
leonb@dublindesign.ie
PURPOSE OF WORKSHOP
To provide some insights into the origins of typography and it’s effective use.
2
CAVE PAINTINGS
Early humans used symbols to communicate ideas c.25,000 B.C
Photo Source: http://www.sanford-artedventures.com
Lindisfarne Gospels	3
THE ORIGINS OF OUR ALPHABET
THE PHOENICIANS
c.1050 B.C – The first phonetic alphabet
4
THE	ORIGINS	OF	OUR	ALPHABET
THE	ANCIENT	GREEK	ALPHABET c.800 B.C
5
THE ORIGINS OF OUR ALPHABET
ROMAN ALPHABET c.700 B.C
6
Uncial
A more open style practiced by religious scribes c.700 A.D
Book of Kells	Lindisfarne Gospels	7
8
9
Key Moments in the Evolution of Typographic Style
c.1450 – The first major book printed with movable type
11
c.1450 – The first major book printed with movable type in the West
German metal carver Johannes Gutenberg, invented the printing press in mid 15th century
Each letter carved onto a small metal plate called a “punch.”
Letters arranged to form blocks of text.
Molten metal poured over the top to make a mold
Used to print books in larger quantities than had previously been possible
The Bible was first complete book ever printed
This invention changed the world, allowing rapid production and distribution of printed ideas
12
Core Typography 1
HOT-METAL TYPESETTING
Moveable Type
The character forms, strongly influenced type design for centuries. Gutenberg’s font had more than 300
characters to imitate textura style of the scribes.	13
Core Typography 1
NICHOLAS JENSON 1420 – 1480
Typographer, French
Nicholas Jenson was responsible for the development of the first full roman typeface, which was based on humanistic characteristics and was highly legible.
14
Core Typography
ENLIGHTENMENT AND ABSTRACTION
Whereas humanist designers such as Geofroy Tory were inspired by the human body, this ideal letter- form was created along quasi-scientific lines. These engravings by Louis Simonneau is from an alphabet commissioned by Louis XIV in 1693. The engravings were the basis of a royal typeface (romain du roi) designed by Philippe Grandjean.
The painter and designer Geofroy Tory believed that the proportions of the alphabet should reflect the ideal human form. He wrote, “the cross- stroke covers the man’s organ of generation, to signify that Modesty and Chastity are required, before all else, in those who seek acquaintance with well-shaped letters.”
Core Typography
CLAUDE GARAMOND 1490 – 1561
French Publisher, Type Designer & Punch Cutter
Credited with the introduction of the apostrophe, the accent and the cedilla to the French language.
He was an assistant to Geoffroy Tory
Several contemporary typefaces, including those currently known as Garamond, Granjon, and Sabon, reflect his influence.
16
EARLY TYPOGRAPHERS
1692 – 1831
Caslon, Baskerville & Bodoni
		
William Caslon
1692 - 1766
English gunsmith and designer of typefaces
John Baskerville
1706 - 1775
English businessman, in areas including japanning and papier-mâché, but he is best remembered as a printer and typographer.
Giambattista Bodoni
1740 - 1813
Italian typographer, type-designer, compositor, printer and publisher.
17
The types of the eighteenth-century English printer William Caslon are characterized by crisp, upright characters that recall the fluid strokes of the flexible steel pen and the pointed quill.
18
In the late eighteenth century, the English printer John Baskerville created type with such contrast between thick and thin elements that his contemporaries are said to have accused him of “blinding all the Readers of the Nation; for the strokes of [his] letters, being too thin and narrow, hurt the Eye.”
These roman and italic letters were printed by Giambattista Bodoni. They exhibit extreme contrast between thick and thin elements.
Printers now began to distinguish between book printing and commercial printing or ‘jobbing’. This new phase of printing required a new aesthetic.
Typefaces from previous centuries were now deemed inadequate for the new medium of advertising.
Bigger, bolder type was required to make messages stand out in the grey printed environment.
And so the Fat Face or Bold Face was born, one of the first created by Robert Thorne in 1803.
The rise of advertising in the nineteenth century stimulated demand for large-scale letters that could command attention in urban space. In this lithographic trading card from 1878, a man is shown posting a bill in flagrant disregard for the law.
 
This 1875 American advertising poster uses a dozen different fonts to maximize the scale of letters in the space allotted. Although the typefaces are richly varied, the centered layout is static and conventional.
This Dada poster uses a variety of typefaces as well as advertising “cuts” (stock illustrations available in the printer’s shop). The layout is
innovative and dynamic, fighting against the grid of letterpress. Iliazd,1923.
	
The first widely used Sans Serif font was Akzidenz Grotesk - developed by the Berthold type foundry in 1896.
Akzidenz is the German term for ‘schrift’ or type used by commercial - as opposed to book - printers.
Grotesk is the nineteenth century German word for Sans Serif.
In the United States the typeface was simply known as Standard.
The light weight includes a set of lowercase numerals (shown in red - right) designed by Erik Spiekermann in 1990.
Herbert Bayer designed universal, consisting of only lowercase letters constructed with circles and straight lines, at the Bauhaus in 1925
It wasn't until over a hundred years later that the Bauhaus school of design in 1919 popularized sans serif type design. Stroke width is consistent, which gives it a clean and modern look particularly fitting for Bauhaus design.
Sans serif type - until then reserved for headlines and captions - was seen by many as most appropriate for asymmetric page layouts that broke with traditional styles.
It is worth noting that it was at this time also that the idea of ‘graphic design’ as a separate discipline to printing or fine art began.
Designed by Paul Renner in Germany, 1927, Futura is a practical and subtle font that remains widely used today.
Futura had the honor of being the first typeface on the moon, chosen for a commemorative plaque left by the astronauts of Apollo 11 in 1969.
Iconic filmmaker Stanley Kubrick used Futura religiously in many of his films, notably 2001: A Space Odyssey and Eyes Wide Shut.
Futura (and its variants) have become an extremely popular typeface for countless corporate logos, commercial products, films and advertisements for years. In fact, so popular that certain art directors had began boycotting its use in with Art Directors Against Futura Extra Bold Condensed, published in 1992's TDC Typography 13.
Regardless, Futura remains one of the most used (and loved) sans-serif fonts today with no signs of slowing down.
Designed by Eric Gill in 1928, Gill Sans is based on the typeface his teacher Edward Johnston created in 1916 for the signage of the London Underground.
Gill’s lettering is based on classic roman proportions, which give the sans-serif a less mechanical feel than its geometric contemporaries. The typeface was initially recommended for advertising and headline use, but as the public got used to reading sans-serif, Gill Sans turned out to work just as well for body text.
Although Adrian Frutiger is well respected for a number of widely used typefaces, his masterwork is Univers.
Released in 1957 by the Deberny & Peignot foundry, Paris, about the same time that Helvetica was released and in response to the same perceived need for a utilitarian, versatile sans serif workhorse.
Frutiger used numbers instead of names to describe the palette of widths and weights of Univers.
This was in an effort to eliminate the growing confusion in typeface terminology - thin/light, regular/medium, bold/black.
In any 2-digit descriptor, the first number designates character width. Even numbers indicate Italics and odd numbers indicate Romans.
Helvetica was developed in 1957 by Max Miedinger with Eduard Hoffmann at the Haas'sche Schriftgiesserei (Haas Type Foundry) of Münchenstein, Switzerland. Haas set out to design a new sans-serif typeface that could compete with the successful Akzidenz Grotesk in the Swiss market.
Originally called Neue Haas Grotesk, its design was based on Schelter-Grotesk and Haas' Normal Grotesk. The aim of the new design was to create a neutral typeface that had great clarity, no intrinsic meaning in its form, and could be used on a wide variety of signage.
The French designer Philippe Apeloig created these contemporary variations on reduced, geometric typefaces.
The Dutch designer Wim Crouwel published his designs for a “new alphabet,” consisting of no diagonals or curves, in 1967.
CLASS EXERCISE
Type Study: Helvetica Lowercase