Concept Development & the Design Process
Introduction
Unit 4: Techniques & Processes
Learning Outcomes
Evaluate a given brief to identify stakeholder requirements and areas for investigation and research.
Explore concepts, materials and processes through experimentation and testing.
Present a body of work that includes evidence of development process, as well as final outcomes.
Assess own process and outcomes, based on reflection and feedback of others.
Techniques & Processes
A strong design process is key in creating a strong outcome.
Every great design solution has a strong concept behind it, there are techniques you can use to help develop concepts and work through your process.
This module is about establishing tools and techniques that work for you. Methods that you can continue to develop and use throughout your studies and career.
During the initial stages of the design process, the aim is to generate many ideas, then we are more likely to have unique and innovative ideas, more likely to lead to interesting design solutions.
You will be learning how to think and work conceptually.
You will also be learning how to evaluate and refine your work.
Learning Process
There are guidelines, tools and techniques that work well, but it is up to you to carve out your own approach and establish what works best for you.
Each project will be unique. There is no one right answer. You will each develop a unique solution to the brief.
What is important is to try to challenge yourself, experiment and take risks. Question assumptions and see if you can discover some new skills.
Don’t be afraid to get it ‘wrong’. You must make mistakes in order to progress, exploration towards good ideas will have to contain some obvious, random ideas too!
As a class you will be supportive of each other.
The Design Process
Design Process
Design is a process that turns a brief/ requirement into a finished product or design solution.
A creative solution can only be directed by a solid design process.
The design process is the most important thing you will master during your time in college.
Document your design process in your sketchbook.
Design Process
Design Process
Define
Research
Ideate
Define the Brief
What are you being asked to do? This is normally outlined clearly in your brief. Have you a clear understanding of the problem? Do you know exactly what is being asked of you? As the project progresses, you should constantly refer back to the brief to keep you on track.
Research
Get to know the subject of the brief. Gather all the facts. This involves researching the problem/topic, its history, opinions, theories etc. This also involves gathering visual research, to inform yourself. In addition to visual research on your subject matter you should consider researching good examples of other design solutions of a similar nature to see what you can learn.
Idea Generation
This is where you get to play with what you have learnt. Take each aspect from your research stage and explore further by developing ideas which might lead to solutions to the problem. At this stage it is important to have as many ideas as possible down on paper. Sketch, write, experiment.
Design Process
Prototype
Evaluate
Implement
Prototype
This is the working-up of your ideas. These can then be reviewed for feedback from your client/lecturer/peers. There should be a wide selection of worked-up ideas which have been derived from your ideas stage. Don’t filter your ideas – try everything! Experiment with varying layouts, styles, media, tones, moods etc. Reiterate, reiterate, reiterate!
Evaluate
It is now time to select the best options from the last step. Reflect on your ideas. Seek feedback and decide which of your ideas have best met the brief. Pick your best ideas and eliminate any that don't work. Learn to be objective here.
Implement
Once you have selected your final solutions, refine further, then seek feedback and select your best. Ensure that your final solution is presented in its best light. Your final design should be presented both verbally and visually with clarity, confidence and creativity.
Design Concepts
A Design Concept
Concept = “an abstract idea”
At the heart of every effective design solution lies a concept.
It should be unique, memorable and fit for purpose.
A design concept, which carries the strategy and content of the design, has the job of connecting with the viewer. It should be visually dynamic.
The concept should be conveyed consistently if it is to communicate with clarity.
It informs all subsequent design decisions - colours, typography, imagery, messaging etc.
A Design Concept
A design concept can be difficult to define, and difficult to understand at first. It is not a rigid or tangible thing.
The skills you will be developing during this module will form the foundation of your design skillset and be utilized when you are working on design projects in industry.
The best way to gain a better understanding is through looking at examples of real world design projects …
The ideas behind the designs …
Branding, MTV World Creative Studio, Pentagram
www.pentagram.com
“Pentagram responded to the brief by designing a set of logos that replicate digital, analog and combined waveforms that celebrate MTV's history of pioneering audiovisual content.
The logomarks are short waveforms, which are animated, extended and equalised to match the beats of music. The waveforms are distinct, simple black and white forms that allow the brand’s creative work to come to the fore.
The logos’ movement represents the ever- changing sounds and beats, whilst their monochromatic colour palette allows them to work alongside photography.”
The ideas behind the designs …
Poster Design, Johnson 100, Pentagram
www.pentagram.com
“The poster, made up of a network of lines that interlink and channel into each other, represents the complexity of the underground network that Johnston seamlessly helps travellers to navigate.
A monochromatic colour palette is used, its black and muted tones emphasising the letterforms themselves.”
The ideas behind the designs …
Branding, Nesta, Pentagram
www.pentagram.com
“The logo visual system, made from a combination of separate floating shapes, represents the organisation’s way of working. There are deliberate gaps and splits in the shapes, creating the moments of friction, movement and invention that are essential to Nesta’s work. The overall effect is an effervescent energy that breeds constant action.
The identity reflects Nesta’s flexible personality by presenting it as universe of planets that shift and change according to your point of view. It is inspired by the avant-garde artwork of Kasimir Malevich and the mobiles of Alexander Calder. This visual style has been applied across all of Nesta’s sub-brands.”
Generating Ideas
Generating Ideas
RESEARCH
First you must research, understand your subject matter and develop a well of information and reference imgery which can help to initiate the idea generation process.
Subsequently, you use further research to inform the development and refinement of ideas.
EVALUATION
Evaluation means asking yourself what is effective or not effective about potential solutions.
A predefined set of objectives will help in the evaluation of your work.
What are the objectives for the project? What is required by the brief?
Brainstorming
Brainstorming is a useful tool which involves lateral thinking.
When brainstorming all ideas and thoughts are noted.
It is best to write down any idea that comes to mind without critique.
The goal is to jot down as many things as possible without spending much time thinking about any of them – just let them lead to new ideas.
Often with brainstorming, you get a long list of results, which are available to you for inspiration later in the project.
Visual & Verbal Mind-Maps
A mind map is an intricate web of thoughts, ideas, names, words and images that all stem from one central idea or word in diagram form.
Mind mapping is a way to brainstorm in a more visual way by showing how different ideas are connected to each other.
Allow a mind-map to flow outwards organically, and don’t stop to judge what your are putting down, this will stop the flow of thought. You can review / evaluate at a later stage.
The loose and visual manner in which a mind map is created is not only a fantastic tool to ‘free up’ creativity, its a great way to communicate to clients and team members while in a design’s concept phase.
Mind mapping is a very successful way to get those creative juices flowing.
This type of activity promotes lateral thinking, removing a rigid structure and freeing up how we are thinking.
We start in the center with the issue or problem we are working on and then as we move further away we get better and better ideas as we force ourselves to follow the branches on the map.
The first few sections of your mind map will usually consist of ideas that seem fairly obvious, but the further outwards you move, the more extreme and unusual they become. This is why it is important not to stop and critique yourself if your mind-map is flowing well.
Sketching
Designers tend to be naturally visual thinkers so sketching can be a fast and fluid way to get your thoughts onto the page.
Whether you feel you are good at drawing or not, give it a try.
Its not about the quality of the drawing but the expression of ideas, starting the process of giving visual form to your ideas.
Initial sketches and finished solution, identity design by Michael Bierut
Initial sketches and finished solution, art by Gary Baseman
Initial sketches and finished solution, typography by Jessica Hische
Graphic: Inside the Sketchbooks of the World's Great Graphic Designers by Steven Heller & Lita Talarico
Initial sketches and finished solution, design by Stefan Sagmiester
Graphic: Inside the Sketchbooks of the World's Great Graphic Designers by Steven Heller & Lita Talarico
Mark-Making & Experimentation
As a way to generate and also develop and refine your ideas, you will be encouraged to be expressive and explorative in your sketchbook.
Mark-making means to fluidly express ideas using marks and sketches. This can be expressive and should involve using different types of media for different effects.
Use your concept as the driver when exploring what media and materials to use in both development work and the finished piece.
Know in advance what you want your choice of materials to convey. Brainstorm words that support your concept and see how you can represent these ideas in a tactile way – be it smooth, spiky, rough or soft surfaces.
Composition Sketching
Once you have a strong concept, you are by no means done. Now comes the part where you give this idea a visual form, and refine this form until it is clear and succinct.
Sketching small rough compositions is how we develop the visual forms of the A2 emotion board.
The first iteration is rarely the best so explore lots of ways to look at your piece.
Many compositions should be worked through. Each time try changing some element or removing some part to see if you can simplify.
The aim is that the final piece will be a succinct visual that strongly and impactfully conveys your chosen concept.
©eva_magill_oliver on Instagram
The Niner
The Niner is a tool that you may use when working on a design project and have come to a stumbling block.
It is a means of helping you to identify your client on a more personal level. It helps you clarify the market that you wish to appeal to.
The designer starts off with a grid, and asks themselves a question associated with each square on the grid.
For example; what brand of clothing might your customer wear, or what activities might he/she do at the weekends.
It gives you an idea of what products or services your target market currently use allowing you to carry out more research and generate ideas.
Finding Inspiration
There is no limit to where ideas and inspiration can come from. Inspiration can come from anywhere and everywhere. It is important to open your mind to inspiration and pay attention to everything that surrounds you.
Art
Nature
Science
Architecture
Works of Fiction/Non-fiction
Daily Experiences
Television
Movies
Music
Historical Influences
It is a good idea to carry a sketchbook with you when you can – sitting in front of the computer is the last place that you should expect to become inspired.
Sketchbooks - Handout
For more guidelines on generating ideas and thinking creatively refer to the following:
The A - Z of Visual Ideas: How to Solve any Creative Brief
by John Ingledew
Graphic Design Thinking: Beyond Brainstorming
by Ellen Lupton
A Smile in the Mind: Witty Thinking in Graphic Design
by Beryl McAlhone, David Stuart
Basics Design: Design Thinking: 8
by Gavin Ambrose, Paul Harris
Basics Graphic Design 03: Idea Generation
by Neil Leonard, Gavin Ambrose
*All books listed are available in the DID library
Brief 1 – Emotion Board
In order to focus solely on design process; idea generation, evaluation, creation skills we have removed the componenets of a traditional graphic design project – typography, imagery etc.
This brief focuses on visually representing an emotion through
form, texture and colour, informed by your design concept.