After reading this chapter, you should be familiar with the following: 
Purpose of photography and other visuals in graphic design 
Considerations when researching and using imagery 
Features of high-quality imagery 
Purpose of Imagery in Graphic Design
Images are visual representations of things, like items, people, landscapes, or ideas. It can include photographs, illustrations, drawings, and other graphics. For this lesson, we’ll focus primarily on photography.
No matter how great a textual design is, as a graphic designer, you will inevitably work with images. It may be static, dynamic, still or animated imagery. A well-placed, quality photograph captures an audience’s attention within a single moment, generally more often than with text or typeface. Studies show the human brain responds to visuals 60,000 times faster than the written word.
Fig 1. Pixabay (n.d.) Working with imagery in graphic design
Images can fulfill the following vital roles in design:
Show what a product looks like
Convey a particular message
Connect with an audience, consciously or subconsciously
Attract attention (visual attractiveness)
Support, contrast or balance the meaning of the text
.
Considerations For Using Stock Images
If all else fails, you will need to use stock images. Maybe you don’t have access to a photographer or marketing agency, or are bound by a tight budget. In this case, the stock images will have to do.
Fig 7. Example of a website (Pixabay) for stock images
The following sites, with both free and paid images, can make life easy when you’re in a pinch and can offer a plethora of imagery for you to choose from:
Adobe stock
Pexels
Pixabay
Picjumbo
Unsplash
Freepik
Shutterstock
iStock
Flickr
StockSnap
Visualhunt
Tips when using stock photos:
Ensure that you are abiding by any creative licence requirements. For example, some images on Pixabay or Pexels don’t require any referencing, and you can use them freely. However, other sites like Visualhunt will require that you apply the necessary referencing/citations. 
When looking for appropriate images, consider their potential to evoke a particular emotion - positive or negative. Those are the most powerful images.
Select stock images that match your graphic design’s colour palette.
Look for images that don’t look like stock photos.
Choose images that are directly relevant to your designs.
Choose pictures that are of high quality.
If in doubt, always choose imagery that includes people rather than scenery or an abstract visual. An audience is more likely to identify and relate to such photographs.
Over To You
Now it’s your turn to explore the impact of imagery. 
Do you think the imagery used on the carrier bag (Figure 8), as part of a marketing strategy for a product that curbs nail-biting, is memorable? Why or why not?
Fig 8. Openverse (n.d.) "Stop 'n Grow Advertising Bag" by Arturo de Albornoz
Head over to the forum and share your thoughts with your fellow students. 
Image references:
Source for Figures 1-5 and 7: Pixabay.com
Source for Figure 6: Pexels.com
Source for Figure 8: Openverse.org