A condensed History of Graphic Design - Part 1
As time travels through history, art will always be present, continually reforming, mutating and reshaping in tandem with the changes of the world. Graphic design is no exception and its rich and detailed history is both a reflection and a spotlight on the events and the people of each period. 
In this lesson you will be introduced to key movements in the evolution of Graphic Design. 
In this section you will learn about:
The Industrial Revolution to the The Victorian Era
These movements span the 18th and 19th centuries when agriculture and industry were going through profound changes. The emergence of technological, business and creative innovations during this time would create the very foundation for many graphic design elements, most of which remain present in the industry today. 
The Industrial Revolution
Inventions and Innovations
The Industrial Revolution which spanned from the 1760s to the 1840s, saw huge changes in the way things were made in both Europe and the U.S. There was a complete shift from cottage industries, or handmade rural produce, to mass machine production in urban factories.
This also introduced major changes in agriculture, 
Printing & Graphic Design
As people began adjusting to machine production and the enormous social changes that came with it, graphic communications became more important and subsequently, more predominant. Advertising has always come hand in hand with the production of consumer goods and as with other commodities, technology would yield a new age in advertising with  lower unit costs and the subsequent increase in the production of printed materials. Although revolutionary at the time, printing techniques using moveable type were still restricted to an inflexible grid layout and limited typeface options.
Colour Lithography
(Chromolithography)
But when chromolithography arrived, so did new possibilities for multi-coloured creative expression in advertising and design. Chromolithography is the use of engraved plates and chemicals to create an image and was dependent on the correct alignment of colour plates. By the late 1800s its popularity had grown immensely.
Coca Cola Advertisement, Late 1800s Chromolithograph
Example of a lithography press, https://pixabay.com/photos/graphic-print-pressure-graphically-2698807/
A. Hoen & Co in Baltimore, US is one of the first printing companies to use the technology
Typography and new possibilities in graphic design
As advertising became more present in popular culture, its needs and uses would begin to expand.  Larger scale messages with a greater visual impact were demanded and with changes in printing there was a new freedom of expression in typography and printed characters in general. It was no longer enough for the twenty-six letters of the alphabet to function only as phonetic symbols. The typography that had originated in handwriting and evolved to text, simply failed to fulfil these needs. As the great mind of Plato once said “necessity is the mother of invention”
The powerful wake of the industrial age brought new forms of advertising that would necessitate the transformation of simple letters into abstract visual forms projecting powerful concrete shapes of strong contrast and large size. The high quality and speedy turnaround of lithography coupled with the ability to be more creative meant that designers had the freedom to allow their designs to expand in new ways. Lithography is a method of print that began with stone but is also used with metallic plates. It allows the user to recreate exactly what the hand has drawn, and can be mass produced. 
Two pioneers of innovative typography were Joseph Jackson (1733–92) and Thomas Cotterell (d. 1785). Jackson was an inventor of typefaces, or a “typefounder” and Cotterell began the trend of sand-casting very large, bold display letters. Over the years, these founders designed and cast broader, chunkier letters as the type grew steadily bolder.
This would lead to the invention of Fat Faces, a major category of type design innovated by Cotterell’s pupil and successor, Robert Thorne (died 1820).
A fat-face type style is a roman face whose contrast and weight have been increased by expanding the thickness of letters and the use of heavy strokes (see across examples).
William Caslon and San Serif
Another major typographic innovation of the early 1800 was the sans-serif type making its modest debut in an 1816 specimen book issued by the Caslon Type Foundry.  Buried among the decorative display fonts of capitals in the back of the book, is Vincent Figgins’ (1766 – 1844)  one line of medium-weight monoline serif-less capitals proclaimed “W CASLON JUNR LETTERFOUNDER.”
The removal of the serifs resembled an Egyptian typeface, which is probably how Caslon designed it. The fact that Caslon named this style “Two Lines English Egyptian” suggests that it indeed has a strong Egyptian style influence.
Sans serifs, which became so important to twentieth- century graphic design, had a tentative beginning. It wasn’t until the 1830s when several type founders began introducing new sans-serif styles that it first became noticed.
But it was in 1832 when Vincent Figgins dubbed his 1832 specimen Sans Serif, in recognition of the font’s most apparent feature, that the name stuck.
Photography
Joseph Niepce (1765–1833), the French man famous for producing the first ever photographic image, began his research by seeking an automatic means of transferring drawings onto printing plates.
In 1822 he coated a pewter sheet with a light-sensitive asphalt, called bitumen of Judea, that hardens when exposed to light. Then he contact-printed a drawing, which had been oiled to make it transparent, to the pewter with sunlight. Niepce washed the pewter plate with lavender oil to remove the parts not hardened by light, and then he etched it with acid to make an incised copy of the original. Niepce called his invention heliogravure (sun engraving)
This is Niepse’s image and the first ever known photograph. Its power is not in its composition but simply by virtue of the fact that Niepse managed to successfully print a photograph. It is difficult to interpret but there is a building on the left, a tree also on the left, and a barn immediately in front. The exposure lasted eight hours, so the sun had time to move from east to west, hence the shine on both sides of the building.
Daguerreotype
During this time, Louis Jacques Daguerre (1799–1851), had been conducting similar research and on 7 January 1839 he perfected his process and presented it to the French Academy of Sciences.
The academy marvelled at the clarity and minute detail of his prints plus the incredible accuracy of the images. His process involved a highly polished silver- plated copper sheet that was sensitised by placing it, silver side down, over a container of iodine crystals. After the rising iodine vapour combined with the silver to produce light-sensitive silver iodide, the plate was placed in the camera and exposed to light coming through the lens, to produce a latent image. The bare metal appears black in areas where no light struck it. The luminous, vibrant image was a base relief of mercury and silver compounds that varied in intensity in direct proportion to the amount of light that had struck the plate during exposure. This became known as the daguerreotype. 
Louis Jacques Daguerre, Paris boulevard, 1839. 
In this early daguerreotype, the wagons, carriages, and pedestrians were not recorded because the slow exposure could only record stationary objects. On the lower left street corner, a man stopped to have his boots polished. He and the polisher are believed to be the first people ever to be photographed
Photograms
Simultaneous research was conducted in England by William Henry Fox Talbot (1800–77), who pioneered a process that formed the basis for both photography and photographic printing plates. These images were made without a camera and Talbot named them photogenic drawings.
Images made by manipulating light and objects on photographic paper are known today as photograms and the technique was often used by twentieth-century graphic designers.
Photojournalism
When the American Civil War broke out, Mathew Brady (c. 1823–96). set out in a white duster and straw hat carrying a handwritten card from Abraham Lincoln reading “Pass Brady-A. Lincoln.” This meant he had access to all areas of the battlefield and would become known as the father of photojournalism.
During the war Brady invested a $100,000 fortune to send a score of his photographic assistants to document the American Civil War. From Brady’s photography wagons, dubbed “Whatsit” by the Union troops, America’s most brutal conflict would be forever etched in the collective memory of the people.
Brady’s photographic documentation had a profound impact upon the public’s romantic ideal of war. Battlefield photographs coupled with artist's sketches were reference materials for wood-engraved magazine and newspaper illustrations.
Motion Pictures
But photography was still evolving and as the technology became more sophisticated, so too did the experiments and discoveries of curious minded photographers. 
It was a $25,000-dollar wager that would set the scene for the birth of the motion picture. 
In 1877 San Francisco photographer Eadweard Muybridge (1830–1904) was commissioned by Leland Stanford, a former governor of California and the president of the Central Pacific Railroad, to settle a bet. Stanford wanted evidence to prove his theory that a trotting horse lifted all four feet off the ground simultaneously.
While working on the problem, Muybridge began photographing a horse’s stride at regular intervals. Through persistent experimentation, it was in 1878 when he finally found the solution. 
Muybridge set up a battery of twenty-four cameras facing an intense white background in the dazzling California sunlight. The cameras were equipped with rapid drop shutters that were slammed down by springs and rubber bands as Occident, Stanford’s horse galloped along breaking the threads attached to the shutters. The resulting sequence of photographs arrested the horse’s movement in time and space, and Stanford, a horse trainer and breeder, won his bet.
The logical extension of Eadweard Muybridge’s innovation was the development of motion-picture photography. This is the kinetic medium of changing light passing through a series of still photographs that the human eye will connect through the persistence of vision. Just like a film reel..
The Victorian Era
As image experimentation continued to yield surprising and revolutionary results, social and cultural movements were, as always, in flux.
Under the reign of Queen Victoria there was a renewed emphasis on a strict religious devotion and moral conservatism. With industrialisation came wealth, optimism, nostalgia, an increasing distinction between the social classes. The rise of elitism was accompanied by the emergence of new design styles with Victorianism characterised by excess of ornamentation and decoration. And Graphic Design was no exception.
Typical traits of graphics in the Victorian era were: 
Ornate
Fussy
Nostalgic (for objects of the past)
Sentimental
Idealised beauty
Romantic
Cluttered
Decorative
Symmetrical Layout
Type in cloth banners
Hand engraved
Curved elaborate typography
Images framed with architectural motifs
Fills every corner of the page
The values of the Victorian era were clearly conveyed graphic design with a strong emphasis on sentimentality, nostalgia, and a concept of idealised beauty.  This was largely expressed through printed images of children, maidens, puppies, and flowers. Victorian popular graphics were produced using chromolithography, an innovation of the Industrial Revolution that unleashed a flood of colourful printed images. This culminated in highly illustrative and decorative designs where image and type are integrated and heavily ornamented.
The Victorian tin-can label of the Butterfly Brand and the original business card or trade card with the “peacock” motif demonstrate the integration of illustration with decorative patterns All of which were derived from Owen Jones’s “Grammar of Ornament” where echoes of his work on ornament and pattern can still be found in the work of contemporary designers to this day. 
The same style of design soon emerged in the posters and advertisements of travelling amusements such as circuses and carnivals. Designers of these entertainment spectacles favoured dramatic illustrations with bold, simple lettering placed on brightly coloured backgrounds and border design. Travelling shows, literary works, and theatrical performances also adopted the same complex montage designs to promote their work and to engage viewers.
Because of the comparatively slower pace of nineteenth century life and the relative lack of competition, these advertisements were designed for greater viewing time as opposed to today’s fast paced and short lived commercial endeavours. 
The Greeting Card
In the late 1860’s, Louis Prang and Co. had been producing Christmas images suitable for framing but it was in 1873 when the company began to publish the Christmas greeting card. First in England followed a year later by the USA. 
Typical images included Santa Claus, reindeer, and Christmas trees. Soon they would become household items and a full line of designs followed. These included Easter, birthday, Valentine, and New Year’s Day cards which were produced annually by L. Prang and Company during the early 1880s.
Prang sometimes used as many as forty stones for one design. Exceptional quality was achieved by dropping the master black plate in favour of a slow building and heightening of the image through the use of many plates bearing subtle colours.
Advertising
As image production became more stylised and print capabilities made mass production possible, it is no surprise that advertising would find a way to utilise these innovations.  Many of the design conventions of persuasive selling were developed during the last two decades of the nineteenth century and advertisements from the English and American magazines of the period demonstrate some of these techniques
Victorian Typography
Different era’s of design have many unique identifiers that will differentiate them from one another. They are all a reflection or a response to their period in history but it is also the manner in which the elements are combined that makes a style typical of their era. 
The Victorian era heralded more than bold colour and ornate imagery; there was also the highly ornate letterform that was fitting with the overall design aesthetic of the era. Much of the influence came from the previous gothic design style and calligraphic approach. The letters had a bold presence but with feminine flourishes. There were extremes in variations of type and size with every inch of a frame or page filled with ornamental design. 
Elaborate Typefaces
Some of the more elaborate typeface designs came from designers such as Herman Ihlenburg (b. 1843) and John F. Cumming (b. 1852). Ihlenburg designed over eighty display typefaces and cut punches for over thirty-two thousand typographic characters. This is all the more remarkable in light of the extreme complexity of many of his designs
Cumming was responsible for the design of numerous elaborate typefaces for the Dickinson Type Foundry in Boston, but it was around that time in the 1890’s that the passion for ornate Victorian typefaces was beginning to decline. 
Graphic design is a constantly meandering river of creativity and as one movement declines, another is always in the wings, ready for its moment. 
Next on the table would be the revival of classical typography inspired by the English Arts and Crafts movement.