2nd Year Professional Development
Lecturer: Hazel Coonagh BA Visual Communications
Term 2 week 1 Role of Graphic Designer
Term 2 Week 1
Role of Graphic Designer - Tutorial
What does a Graphic Designer Do?
Like many disciplines in art and design, graphic design has been revolutionised by the digital age. In the past, graphic designers would often have specialised in one particular area of design, but nowadays the speed and relative ease of production techniques allow designers to diversify.
Many graphic designers are self-employed and either work on their own or within a small design group, so it makes economic sense to undertake many different tasks within the field to avoid having to pay another designer or outsourcing services. Doing this can impact on your budget and increase the timeline as you try to find the right match and negotiate the brief and cost.
If a company employs you, it is likely that you will work within a small business.
A lot of larger employers tend to sub-contract work to smaller and/or regional businesses as required. However, there is a trend for many large organisations to bring design in-house, so they have more control over their brand, budget and deadlines and have a dedicated resource or team to provide their marketing or product material.
Some of the Financial Institutions eg (Irish Life, VHI etc) Pharma companies, TV & Production etc There is a huge range of creative activity falling under the umbrella term of graphic design. Many of the
categories identified below are related to a graphic design pathway, but could also link to related disciplines, such as multi-media, photography or lens- based media.
Some of the Areas/Industries a Graphic Designer Could be Employed in
Graphic Design Studio
Advertising Agency
TV or Film Production Company (inc Animation)
PR or Marketing Agency
Publication Company
Printers
Large Corporations (Financial Institutions, Pharma, Tech)
Charities & Not for Profit
Medium/large sizes chains that produce a lot of quick turn around short shelf literature or graphics (SuperMacs, Top Oil etc)
This list is not exhaustive, and you would be surprised where a graphic designer may pop up or be required.
Sample roles or skills within the scope of a graphic designer
There are a number of job roles within the world of advertising, marketing & industry, depending on the size of the organisation.
Design Studios, Ad Agencies, Media agencies etc
Concept Artist / Storyboard Artist / Visualiser – traditionally, a visualiser would draw up rough images of advertisements, posters and other literature. Pre-digital, this would often be rendered in magic-marker pen to give the client an impression of how the piece would look. This might also include mock-ups for packaging or point-of-sale concepts. The task of visualising has not changed, but now visual concepts can be produced on the computer and given a more finished look.
Illustrations or concepts for photo-shoots may well be hand-drawn as they were in the past, and then scanned in and positioned digitally for the mock-up. Drawing up a story board sequence in advance of creating a movie, motion graphic or advert is a useful process to aid production and help get sign off or implement changes before heavy production costs start.
Artworker – an artworker prepares the finished artwork for print, and may be working from a visualiser’s concept. An artworker has to translate the concept into a format that will work on a practical and technical basis, and requires sophisticated creative skills. Prior to the computer age, this was a time consuming job involving liaising with typesetters, pasting up type from proofs, and scaling and positioning images within the layout.
It remains a highly skilled job, but is now cleaner, more flexible and less time consuming. Items can be easily imported, positioned and scaled using industry- standard desktop publishing programs such as Photoshop and Adobe InDesign, and text can be altered and edited within the program.
An artwork needs to have expert knowledge of the end production process e.g traditional print or digital as it will govern how the artwork is prepared and supplied to the end production.
Eg full colour print need high-res artwork provided as CYMK and often with fonts changed to outline. Digital for social media has specific size requirements and pixels etc
Brand & Identity Designer - This might involve the design of a logo and the
application of a design style to encompass roll out to websites, stationery, printed promotional material, television campaigns, vehicle livery and staff uniforms.
The role of a Brand Designer/Consultant has developed hugely over the last few years as brands recognise the importance of building a brand – consistency – tone of voice and target audience. It has become a very wide scope role often involving deep research into the requirements of the brand, the offering, the audience, future proofing and development.
The brand story and origins, every last detail of colour and use of typography, photography etc is carefully designed and executed.
Photographer – graphic designers are likely to have regular contact with photographers, or to be competent photographers themselves. Larger design companies will employ their own or freelance specialist photographers, but for a small company or sole trader it makes more economic sense to use your own skills, if possible. Whether or not you undertake photographic work yourself, it is essential to have a sound working knowledge of photography to know how to integrate it into your design work, and to understand its potential and limitations.
Smart phones have made photographers of us all. Complimenting Digitals skills and software such as photoshop have made so much more possible. Photography and art mix to create unique and often striking pieces of work that appeal to the modern and tech savvy audiences of today.
Animation
Within this field there are concept artists, riggers and background artists to mention but a few roles. An artist or team of artists could be responsible for conceptualising the scenes and deciding on colour and lighting, creating the characters and establishing their features or characteristics.
Storyboard artists – would draw up the story or narrative in a series of frames, in a similar way to narrative in comic strips or graphic novels. As well as illustrating and testing out the story, this would give the team a framework for creating models and sets or devising special effects.
Model makers – these could be artists specialising in three-dimensional work, either producing physical models, or virtual characters through 3D modelling.
Even contemporary animation films, which exploit the properties of computer generated characters use physical models to make characters look authentic.
Set designers & Artistic Directors – create the concepts for stage and set designs and are often
involved in the development of three-dimensional work. This would also role out to Festivals, Concerts and Shows. On hold currently but will be back with a bang in the future.
Film, video & Gaming
The roles of graphic designers in film and video could be very similar to those in animation. In addition they might include the creation of credits at the beginning and end of the film by a motion graphics artist, as well as a designer for promotional work on posters, billboards, production and selection of stills and other promotional material for marketing and advertising the product.
Another thriving industry requirement is in 3D and special effects, particularly in the fantasy genre of both movies and gaming. Highly specialised but growing area.
Publishing and information design
Layout artist – will take all the elements such as illustrations, diagrams, photographs and text and create a composition within a given format. Sometimes the layout artist will have also been responsible for creating the template for that format.
The end production on can be a range of things from traditional printed brochures, manuals, forms, adverts etc to digital assets for social channels or advertising & media
Typographer – a typographic designer will have a sophisticated understanding of the aesthetic properties of letterforms and their creative use, either independently or in combination with images. Typographers use scale, form, colour and texture to exploit the creative potential of letterforms, either to enhance the meaning of text or to create independent visual effects. Some brands will require the creation of their own typeface or font depending on the project.
Photographer – photographers create photographic or digitally manipulated images to illustrate the subject matter of publications. They may also source images, so need a working knowledge of what constitutes a good image. Photographers can work on specific projects and create bespoke images and also supply their images to photostock agencies where they can receive royalties for usage. As mentioned earlier the mix of photographic skills and digital media can enhance and create unique pieces of art and concepts. Food photography is an example of a large growing area within photography
Illustrator – an illustrator will produce artwork that supports and enhances messages in the text, or conveys a narrative independent of the text; he or she may also produce images illustrating ‘how to’ messages, such as instructive text.
Infographics and iconography is a massive and continuously growing area – especially in digital production. Trends in design come and go and Illustration v photography were often trends of the past – now with the use of multimedia design and the need for information graphics illustration has been given a new lease of life.
Useful Resources:
Free or inexpensive subscriptions https://www.freepik.com/home photos and illustrations https://www.flaticon.com/ icons https://graphicburger.com/ - graphic designer resource site https://www.pexels.com/ Video & photography https://pixabay.com/ Video & photography https://biteable.com/ Shorts/animation & movie making
https://www.rawshorts.com/ Shorts/animation & movie making