From time to time you may be required to present hard copy graphic designs (prints) to clients or other stakeholders. To professionally present these designs involves great care and careful consideration of presentation methods, as well as attention to detail. The goal is to showcase the designs in the best possible light. 
Fig 1. Unsplash (n.d.) Printed graphic designs
Here are some tips for presenting hard copy graphic designs professionally:
Use high-quality printing materials
First and foremost, you should always ensure that your graphic designs are printed on high-quality paper or materials using professional printing techniques. Pay attention to colour accuracy, clarity, and detail to ensure that the designs look their best when printed, thus giving your client the best representation of your work.
Fig 2. Pexels (n.d) Size and quality of the print impacts the effectiveness of your presentation
Choose appropriate presentation materials
Depending on the design outcomes you are presenting, select presentation materials such as portfolio binders, folders, or display cases that complement the style and aesthetic of the graphic designs you created. Consider factors such as size, colour, texture, and durability to create a cohesive and professional presentation.
Fig 3. Pexels (n.d) Balance size between the intended outcome size versus the confines of the presentation space
If you are using a mounting board, for example, take care to choose the correct size in accordance with the project brief. For example, if the project involves designing A4 flyers or A1 posters, use a size as close as possible to the intended size of the design. When mounting your design to a mounting board, it is best to use a spray mount for clean adherence to the board. Pritt-stick or similar glue sticks can work well if used sparingly. Note that too much glue can result in bubbles or puckering of the sheets so make sure you have checked and practised in advance. Any sticking material that remains visible is not acceptable, e.g. cellotape or masking tape.
Fig 4. Pexels (n.d.) Adhering work to a mounting board should be done carefully
Organise and arrange designs thoughtfully
When presenting to a client, you should arrange your graphic designs in a logical and visually appealing manner within the presentation materials. One element to think about is colour.  As a background or framing colour, black is a common choice and often works well to present various graphic designs in a professional manner. But, a different colour may also work better. Choose a colour to enhance the specific brand colour palette or the tone you wish to convey to your audience. 
Another element that supports an effective presentation narrative, is the overall flow, sequence, and hierarchy of your work. Ensure that it guides the viewer's attention and creates a cohesive presentation.
Provide context and explanation
Include context and explanation for each design project, such as the client brief, objectives, creative process, and outcomes. This helps viewers understand the rationale behind the designs and appreciate the thought and effort that went into their creation.
Pay attention to detail
Finally, check for any errors or inconsistencies in the printed designs, such as typos, alignment issues, or colour discrepancies. Ensure that the edges of your printed designs are cleanly cut. If you have multiples of the same size images that you want to present, make sure these are consistent. Also consider the layout of your boards. Your prints should all have even margins with consideration for alignment and spacing. For concept boards with multiple items, consider hierarchy. Note that concept boards should be less rigid - your placement and layout should be informed by the type of concept you are trying to convey. Attention to all these details will demonstrate professionalism and enhance the overall quality of your presentation.
Fig 5. The correct vs incorrect way in which to present printed work, in terms of alignment.
Include important information
It is crucial to include relevant information in your presented work, such as contact information and branding elements. If you are representing a design firm or work as a freelance designer under your own business name, this would consist of your logo and website. Ensure that this information is prominently displayed on the presentation materials to make it easy for viewers (e.g. client, users, or other stakeholders) to reach out to you for inquiries, follow-up discussions, or to engage in additional projects.
Another bit of information that you should include in your presentation is references for image sources if/where applicable. Make an effort to display this information on the back of your mounting boards, indicating where you have sourced the images or content from. No referencing system need apply, just the website/publication name will suffice.