Graphic design outcomes can vary widely depending on the project's objectives, target audience, and creative direction. But one thing all graphic designs have in common is that they should always directly address the requirements outlined in the design brief, while also delivering creative and impactful results. Here are several characteristics that  are commonly associated with graphic design outcomes.
Clarity of concept and purpose
The design outcome should effectively communicate the intended message or information in a clear and concise manner that is easy to understand and visually appealing. The design outcome should therefore avoid clutter and confusion, ensuring that the message is clearly understood by the audience.
Fig 1. Unsplash (n.d.) Clarity of concept is key in design
Consistency and accuracy
Consistency in design elements such as colour, font, imagery, and layout is especially important if you’re designing for a brand across multiple platforms. Maintaining consistency and accuracy in your designs helps establish a cohesive brand identity and reinforces brand recognition across all platforms and touchpoints. It is therefore vital that your graphic designs align with existing branding guidelines.
Fig 2. Unsplash (n.d) Design should maintain consistency across products
Suitability and functionality
Suitability relates to the audience and design’s intended medium.  Designs should be tailored to engage a particular audience and work across one or many mediums of presentation or distribution. Whether it's print, digital, or multimedia, the design outcome should be optimised for its intended platform, considering factors like resolution, file format, and interactive elements. It must also ensure that the design is intuitive to use, has clear navigation and accessible features. The intended audience needs to easily navigate and interact with the content. 
Fig 3. Pexels (n.d) Designs should be versatile to serve on multiple platforms
Design outcomes should also be flexible enough to adapt to different contexts or scale as required. This may involve providing variations for different sizes or formats, ensuring the design remains effective across a number of applications.
Audience interpretation and relevance
Effective design outcomes, as mentioned above, will be relevant to the target audience and context. But more importantly, it should evoke emotional responses and engage the audience, taking into account the audience's preferences, needs, and cultural sensitivities. This can be achieved through compelling imagery, persuasive messaging, and thoughtful design choices that resonate with the target audience on a deeper level thus strengthening engagement and brand loyalty.
Fig 4. Unsplash (n.d.) Designs should keep the target audience in mind
An additional factor to consider is that design outcomes should be accessible to everyone, regardless of their abilities or disabilities. Audiences need to be able to access and engage with the content which means designs must consider things like colour contrast, font legibility, readability, and usability.
Creative interpretation and originality
Good design outcomes demonstrate creativity and originality as well as capturing attention. They offer unique solutions to the design problem presented in the brief, setting them apart from generic or predictable designs. You can achieve these strong, aesthetically pleasing visuals by ensuring your design outcomes utilises colour schemes, typography, imagery, and layout in a way that enhances the overall impact and professionalism. 
Fig 5. Unsplash (n.d.) Colour, among other elements, play a role in a design’s effectiveness
Management of constraints
Managing constraints in graphic design is an essential skill that allows designers to work within limitations while still creating effective and visually appealing outcomes. Constraints can come in various forms, including time, budget, client preferences, technical limitations, and project requirements. Typically, a design must be delivered within a specified timeframe and budget as outlined in the design brief. This implies that you, as the designer, must manage your time and resources effectively to guarantee timely completion of the project without exceeding the allocated budget. A thorough understanding of all the constraints will help you to develop and successfully execute appropriate strategies.
Fig 6. Pexels (n.d.) Budget is one of several constraints that impact a project