Sketchbooks
and the Design Process
The Design Process
Design is a process that turns a brief/requirement into a finished product or design solution. A creative solution can only be directed by a solid design process. The design process seeks to generate a large number of possible solutions and utilises various techniques which encourages the designer to think outside the box.
ALL key stages of the design process should be documented in your sketchbook. From project planning, research, case studies, sketching, decision-making, experimenting with materials, insight into how you craft and complete the final piece to reflective notes on your progress and development. This is how you provide insight into how you think and work so don’t leave anything important out.
Thumbnail Compositions / Iterations
Once you have an idea, you need to set about figuring out the best way to give visual form to this idea. This part of the process involves sketching out thumbnail compositions, which are simple, rough drawings. These do not need to be highly accurate.
Once you have done this many times, perhaps tweaking different features of the piece as you go – for example, simplifying aspects of the proposed piece, then you can evaluate these proposals for their effectiveness against the objectives outlined in the brief.
Experimenting with Materials and Media
Experiments – that is – testing / trying / making to determine what works or acheives the desired effect should be an important of your sketchbook. Ensure this process is authentic and chose materials in a considered and relevent way. For example you might isolate a section of your compositional sketch then execute this using a range of different media, techniques or materials. You would then review your work, making some notes on what worked best and why. This would demonstrate purposeful experimentation and result in stronger communication of your concept.
Examples of a design student working through many possible visual forms for a logo - this process tends to be detail orientated, perhaps changing only small elements each time you redraw. Here you demonstrate creative determination, not stopping until you are satisfied you have the best outcome.
Annotations
Annotations are quick notes that help to give context and value to the found visuals in your sketchbook and also insight into your thought process in your development work.
For example: You have gathered some visual research – why did you select these visuals? Have they influenced you in any way? What can you learn from them? Or, you hit a juncture in the project where you made a big change of direction – What happened? Do you feel it’s a good move? Why? Remember that not everything will go smoothly and this is all part of the process, challenges are an opportunity to learn and grow more confident in your skills.
Your Aim for your Sketchbook
Aim to use the sketchbook in a natural way; your process is best documented chronologically. It should also give unique insights into your personal way of working and thinking. It should show your creative skills and the diversity of your ability. It should chart how you deal with challenges and how you are working to improve your skills, to try new things and grow through your work. There is no set formula for how many pages you should complete within your sketchbook, you work and develop until you are happy that you have engaged with the process as thoroughly as you can within the allocated timeframe and achieved the outcomes you had aimed for as best as you can.