The role of Graphic Design
The role of graphic design is simple: we use it to communicate. Graphic design is the art of combining, for example, shapes, symbols, text, and colour, to produce visuals with a clear message. Based on this premise, it is thus the role of a graphic designer to know and understand how to effectively use these different elements and principles of design to communicate something effectively.
What is Graphic design used for in society?
With a specific audience in mind, graphic designers must use a combination of imagery, text, and layout principles to create designs that effectively communicate a specific message.  
When we talk about effective communication, it refers to powerful graphic designs that succeed in guiding the viewer’s attention towards the most essential information. It is not simply about presenting text or imagery in an aesthetically pleasing way, but rather using a full range of elements and principles to achieve the following:
communicate ideas, 
share essential information,
sell or promote an item or ethos,
evoke emotions, 
make good first impressions, 
tell a story about a brand
and promote trust. 
Graphic Design is prominent in all cultures and although there are some cultural differences in the way that a particular element is perceived, the general message and theme of any design remains the same, no matter where you are in the world.
Fig 1. Unsplash (n.d.) Advertising board
Consider a large advertising billboard: its main aim is to either highlight a specific product/item or to make the consumer aware of a certain brand or company. Beyond this initial interaction, a billboard may then also communicate information to the consumer in order to influence their purchasing decisions. It becomes a portal from which an ideology can be conveyed as the consumer looks for insight.
The next time you visit a large shopping mall or a city, look around and notice how billboards, posters, bus boards  (advertising on busses), and A-frame boards (usually on the pavement outside shops) communicate a particular message to you and how they are implementing this. Consider how the advertisement makes use of:
text,
layout,
colour,
typeface,
image,
texture,
or any other element or principle. 

Considering it important role in marketing products and brands, it is important to note that the role of Graphic Design isn’t just to sell an item. It enables certain levels of communication to exist throughout all mediums. For example, look at the way society uses and understands road signs and signage, like the symbols that identify public restrooms. These examples are Graphic Design at its best, making it possible for you - even if you’re in a foreign country - to be able to find your way to the toilet and even around a roundabout.
Fig 2. Pixabay (n.d.) Road signs
By understanding symbols along with imagery and the ways in which they can be perceived by different cultures and societies, a Graphic Designer can tailor these elements to suit a particular need and communicate a message or vision clearly.
Creating Visual Communications
A piece of graphic design can have numerous messages or utilise many different methods to convey these message, but it is always a form of ‘visual communication’. A piece of design work typically uses three main building blocks to communicate a message or feeling:
Colour
Typography
Imagery. 
These critical parts of a work can be applied separately or in combination to form highly effective designs. For example, consider how the packaging for a well-known brand like Coca-Cola or Apple, can instantly create a visual identity and reference for the consumer as they scan it on a shelf in a store. Simply by utilising a shape and colour, the consumer can instantly recognise the brand.


Fig 3. Pixabay (n.d.) Apple products
The role of a brand - Creating Relationships and Building Trust
As mentioned before, a graphic designer's role is to design and create visuals that utilises colour,  type and imagery to communicate something. But a designer must also be mindful, during the creative process, of how this imagery is portrayed to the consumer and how it is consumed. Companies want to build a brand and an identity which will resonate with their target audience, whether they are selling a physical item or a service, so its the designer’s job to be keenly aware of what will interest, engage, and appeal to different target audiences and how best to  communicate a brand or product.

Once a product or service has been communicated and consumers have absorbed it (seen or used it in some way), they will then begin to form a bond with that item or service. In the early stages of this relationship, a bond with a customer is primarily based on aesthetics or identity (its brand), i.e., the visual appeal of the item or service will create an impulse to engage with it and/or make a purchase.
After this initial bonding process, a consumer will begin to engage with the brand on a deeper level. They start to trust the brand and come to rely on it. All businesses rely on this trust, serving as the single guidepost that drives most marketing strategies, especially when it comes to health and beauty/wellbeing brands. These brands rely on a consumer’s trust perhaps more than others, because people rely on these types of pdoructs to help them look and feel healthy and/or beautiful.  
Fig 4. Unsplash (n.d.) LÓreal
The purpose of Graphic Design (beyond marketing)
So far we have explored how design is used primarily as a method of selling communication. But some communications are not necessarily directly related to selling. Consider the following methods of design communications:
Instructional: Involves designing and developing visuals that guide viewers in operating something or following a set of actions. E.g., cooking instructions on the back of certain food packaging, guidelines accompanying a board game, or steps to build a piece of furniture.
Informative: Involves designing and developing graphic work that conveys important information. E.g., a warning sign, a train schedule at the station, or information around a public event (time, date, venue, etc.)
Educational: Involves designing and developing educational materials and experiences that are effective, efficient, and engaging. E.g., classroom resources, a diagram summarising subject content, a timeline infographic, etc.
Entertaining: Involves designing and developing work that simply entertains its audience. E.g., social media emoticons, desktop themes and illustrations, funny e-cards or invites, etc.
Persuasive or subversive: Involves designing and developing material that support a particular social cause or campaign, e.g., for politicians or political movements.
Fig 5. Unsplash (n.d.) Warning sign
Fig 6. Unsplash (n.d.) Instruction
Fig 7. Unsplash (n.d.) Travel information
In todays society, we are constantly bombarded by communications of all types. It is now maybe harder than ever for graphic designers to create work that stand out in such a busy environment and be truly effective.
As you go about your daily routine, take note of just how many different ‘forms’ of graphic design you encounter. How many ‘communications’ have you encountered on your day? 10? 20? 30?
From the moment you wake up and turn to your social media apps on your mobile phone, through to driving to work or getting onto public transport to getting a coffee or ordering some takeaway food. Graphic design is all around us and is intrinsic in everything we do.

