The Value of Keeping A Sketchbook
Sketchbooks are a graphic designer's best friend and trusted ally. They are a repository for ideas and a go-to place for designers to do what they do best, and think visually. As more and more designers turn to the faster options technology can offer, hand-drawing and sketching is becoming somewhat of a lost discipline for the ideation and development process. Regardless of speed and digitisation, sketching still remains a hugely useful tool in a graphic designers armoury. When compared to CAD, it can in fact be an extremely quick way to get simplistic versions of designs or layouts down on paper. Good quality sketching can also enable an individual to work alongside other members of a team to quickly plot out an idea in a clear and legible manner.
Like capturing seeds before they get lost in the breeze, a sketchbook is a great place to quickly jot down ideas. Over time, your notes and doodles will yield insights into the way you think, how you organise your world, and respond to others. These are insights that you can learn from and apply to graphic design projects. 
Fig 1. Michael Bierut notebooks
Sometimes the best ideas arrive at the starting gates of a project, when the imagination runs free and the parameters have yet to be laid. The beginning phase allows you to think freely and open your mind making it one of the most inspiring parts of the design process.
Designer focus: Michael Bierut
One particular designer, Michael Bierut, is a brilliant example of a practitioner who garnered great value and had a huge appreciation for the power of keeping a sketchbook.
Bierut: “On August 12, 1982, I took a 10 x 7 1/8 inch National Blank Book Company composition book from the supply closet of my then employer, Vignelli Associates. From that moment, I have never been without one. I always have one at my desk. I take one with me to every meeting. I am now in the middle of Notebook #85. It's in front of me right now. Together, these well-worn books create a history of my working life that spans three decades”
Minnesota Children’s Museum
Sketchbooks are great for working through mistakes and successes and for filtering through both design clichés and unique and original thinking. One such example is of Bierut’s identity process for the Minnesota Children's Museum. Clichés like crayon markings, bright primary colours, building blocks, balloons and smiley faces were quickly thrashed out.
Bierut: “Sometimes avoiding the obvious means embracing it—and wrestling it to the ground. Children’s hands, with their invitation to touch and their inherent sense of scale, provided the key. Instead of trying to draw them (silhouettes? crayon scribbles?) We recruited local kids to serve as hand models and photographed them pointing, counting, playing.”
Fig 2. Minnesota Children’s Museum project 
As a result, children’s hands now point the way throughout the building, providing a sense of scale and, in the case of the bathroom signs, a bit of wit.
Bierut: “We were lucky that the building had five floors rather than six after having decided on hands as a motif.”
Brooklyn Academy of Music (BAM) Identity
Sketches for the identity for the Brooklyn Academy of Music (BAM) below show chopped-off sans serif typography using News Gothic typeface, blown up to big scale, and cropped in various creative ways.
Fig 3. Brooklyn Academy of Music (BAM) project
I’m With Her: The Hillary Clinton Identity
How do you make a universally known candidate seem fresh and compelling?
Bierut: “What looked like an H was really a window, capable of endless transformations. I wanted something that you didn’t need a software tutorial to create, something as simple as a peace sign or a smiley face. I wanted a logo that a five-year-old could make with construction paper and kindergarten scissors.”
Fig 4. Hilary Clinton campaign design
Fig 5. Hilary Clinton project sketchbook
Overall, a sketchbook is a valuable tool for graphic designers because it supports creativity, idea generation, problem-solving, and personal development. It complements digital design tools and provides a tangible and versatile space for exploring and refining design concepts. A sketchbook is a companion to your design mind and has the potential to become a precious repository to mine as your design path evolves. 