Importance of Composition in Photography
Composition plays a fundamental role in how an image is perceived and how it communicates a message or evokes emotions. Well-composed photographs are visually appealing, guiding the eye towards the most important elements of the image thus generating a stronger impact among viewers. 
Fig 1. Pexels (n.d.) Composition in photography
The Rules of Composition
Taking consistently good pictures should not be mistaken for luck. It is based on an understanding of the fundamental rules of visual composition. Photographers spend much time honing their skills and training their eyes to purposefully capture images that include one or more of the following rules:
Rule of thirds
The golden ratio
Leading lines
Diagonals
Framing
Figure to ground
Fill the frame
Centre dominant eye
Patterns and repetition
Symmetry and asymmetry
Rule of thirds
One fundamental rule of composition is the rule of thirds. To apply this, imagine a grid of nine equal sections laid upon your frame. Divide the vertical space into three parts and the horizontal space into three parts. The intersection points are points the eye tends to go to first. 
Effective composition would be to place your subject (or key element) on one of these points. Placing the main focal point in the centre of a frame is often less interesting and a lot less effective. As with many ‘rules’ in photography, they are flexible, so experiment with the rule of thirds. Deliberately choose where to place something in the frame and know why you are placing it there.
Fig 2. Rule of thirds
Fig 3. Rule of thirds
The golden ratio
The golden ratio is often denoted by the Greek letter phi (φ) and is a mathematical ratio that appears in various aspects of art, nature, and design. In photography, the golden ratio is a compositional guideline used to create aesthetically pleasing and balanced images. The ratio is approximately 1.618, and it is often represented visually as a rectangle known as the golden rectangle.
The point of interest should be placed inside the spiral. This way the viewer’s eye will go straight to this point and follow its natural expansion within the frame.
Fig 3. Golden ratio
Leading lines
Leading lines in photography are compositional elements that draw the viewer's eye deep into the image. These lines can be actual lines present in the scene or implied lines created by the arrangement of elements in the photograph. The purpose of leading lines is to guide the viewer's gaze toward a specific point of interest or to create a sense of “movement”, depth and perspective within the image.
Fig 4. Leading lines
Diagonals
Diagonal lines in photography are a powerful compositional element that adds a dynamic and energetic quality to an image. This is where the elements of an image are organised on a diagonal line.  When lines are positioned diagonally within the frame, they create a sense of movement, depth, and visual interest. Diagonal lines can lead the viewer's eyes along the photograph, guiding them from one point to another. With this, it’s possible to create an image with depth and dynamism.
Fig 5. Diagonal lines
Framing
In photography, framing refers to the technique of using elements within the composition to create a frame around the main subject. This can help draw attention to the subject, add context, and enhance the overall visual appeal of the image. Framing can be achieved through various means, both natural and man-made, and it contributes to the composition and storytelling aspects of a photograph.
Fig 6. Framing
Figure to ground
Figure to ground is a visual perception concept that is relevant to photography and other visual arts. It refers to the relationship between the main subject (the figure) and the background or surroundings (the ground) in an image. The goal is to create a clear distinction between the subject and its surroundings, making the subject stand out as the most prominent element in the image. Done well, it is easier for the viewer to separate elements that contrast with one another. Pictures using figure to ground are more likely to grab the viewer's attention and can also bring depth to your photographs.
Fig 7. Figure to ground
Fill the frame
Filling the frame in photography is a composition technique where the photographer frames the subject tightly, leaving little or no empty space around the edges of the frame. In photography, the frame refers to the edges of your image or the edges of your camera’s viewfinder when you are shooting. The goal is to emphasise the subject, capture details, and create a more impactful and focused image. By eliminating distractions and zooming in on the main subject, photographers can draw the viewer's attention to specific elements and convey a stronger visual message.
Fig 8. Fill the frame
Centre dominant eye
Central composition or ‘centre dominant eye’ refers to placing the main subject or point of interest at or near the centre of the frame. While central composition can be effective in certain situations, it's often advised to explore other composition techniques, such as the rule of thirds or the golden ratio, to create more dynamic and visually interesting images.
Fig 9. Centre dominant eye
Patterns and repetition
Patterns are aesthetically pleasing and are powerful compositional elements in photography. Incorporating these elements can add visual interest, structure, and a sense of rhythm to your images. But patterns and repetition can also be explored by including something in your photograph to interrupt a pattern. This creates an element of the unexpected.
Fig 10. Patterns and repetition
Symmetry and asymmetry
Symmetry and asymmetry are two contrasting compositional techniques used in photography to create visually interesting and balanced images. Understanding and applying these concepts can significantly impact the mood, emphasis, and overall aesthetic of a photograph.
In a symmetrical composition, the two halves of the image are mirror images of each other. This creates a sense of harmony, aesthetic balance and lacks movement. We can also use asymmetry, or unevenness, to create visual interest, tension and movement.
Fig 11. Symmetry
Fig 12. Asymmetry
Perspective
Perspective is the relationship of width, height and depth between elements in a photograph. It is about creating a sense of the three dimensional or visual depth in your work. An illusion of distance is created through relative size and foreshortening. Relative size is when objects in the distance appear smaller than those closer regardless of their actual measurements. Foreshortening is when objects and lines can appear compressed as distance increases along line of sight.
Fig 13. Examples of perspective
Creating perspective in your images can be done by:
Creating visual impact by moving your camera left, right, above and below
Positioning slightly above or below changes the narrative
Experimenting with photographs of the same subject from different perspectives & angles
Applying horizontal and vertical lines that can offer a balanced composition
Using converging lines to convey perspective
Fig 14. Converging lines to create perspective