Editing and Manipulation

Stock photo ID:525615623
When it comes to editing, there is a precarious path to tread when considering ethical responsibility. The history of photojournalism is beset with examples of altered or even faked images so, where does the improvement or enhancement of a photograph stop and manipulation begin? Does the manipulation of an image manipulate an audience? Where is that line and who sets it?
Photographers may create a more visually appealing photograph by simply adjusting the colours and while a composite photograph is a clear ethical violation, they may not be aware that colour manipulation falls into the same bracket. Both adjustments are breaches of ethics as both are a manipulation of an image and therefore a manipulation of how the events are depicted.   
From Henry Peach Robinson onwards, the history of photography contains no shortage of manipulation, from the analogue darkroom through to today’s digital darkroom. 
For example, in 1954, W. Eugene Smith’s photograph of Dr. Albert Schweitzer at work in his Gabon medical clinic was captioned in LIFE magazine as, ‘Toilers, Schweitzer and a carpenter, watch hospital building’. It was the lead image in a Smith’s photo essay on Schweitzer.
Decades would pass before it was discovered that Smith had combined two different negatives to create the final photographic image. Smith had added a silhouetted saw handle and a hand to the frame’s lower right corner. Due to Smith’s status as a photographer, LIFE magazine never suspected any wrongdoing and due to his autonomy at the time, it was virtually impossible for LIFE magazine to detect this manipulation.   
One of the last century’s most iconic photographs, Le Baiser de l’Hôtel de Ville by French photographer Robert Doisneau represents love and Paris, ‘the city of romance’. Imagery such as this was relished in the USA at that time.
Robert Doisneau used friends and aspiring actors to appear in his commissioned images, thus avoiding any potential legal issues. On the day he shot The Kiss by the Hôtel de Ville in 1950, Doisneau was on the Parisian streets with friends walking, talking, holding hands and kissing. Was the image an authentic representation? Is the sentiment true? If the moment was created, staged and encouraged, is truth also present?  
The majority of photojournalists consider stage-managed photographs that are presented as candid shots, to be unethical.
High Dynamic Range (HDR) is effectively designed to enhance and improve what our eyes experience but it has generated some controversy in photojournalism. Most news outlets will have a code of ethics forbidding the alteration of content in their images and many also specifically forbid HDR imaging in news coverage. However, HDR only has limited use for photojournalists as this technique requires very subtle movement in a scene, even at a high frame rate. One can also produce HDR shots with a single RAW file.   
Technology and digital photography have provided countless opportunities to alter photojournalistic images including removing or adding items but, it is vital that we demand to see the ‘truth’.
Stock photo ID:1087549750
How is dodging and burning and pushing and pulling film in the darkroom any different from digital editing? Aren’t the ethical considerations the same whether it’s a darkroom or a digital edit? Is the line drawn solely with cutting and pasting and deleting and adding?  
Ask yourself who will benefit from a particular manipulation? Will the viewer learn more or is the manipulation in the interest of the publication, the photographer or just the aesthetic? As a photojournalist, how would you feel explaining your actions to a reader?
Using HDR or creating a composite by combining different moments into a single image will alter the moment and in the context of news, this warrants full disclosure to an audience.
It is incumbent on a photographer and photo editor to depict and maintain truth. Should they choose to deceive, there is little protection. An audience needs to believe that a photograph is a faithful depiction of a moment in time but as photographers, we are acutely aware of how much can be ‘created’. 
As photojournalism navigates the digital age of social media, there are times when ethics and the law can be both misunderstood and ignored. Coverage and sources are increasingly crowdsourced which challenges the credibility of images.
Stock photo ID:520192537
Photojournalists need to be mindful that when they edit their work, they do it for technical issues and not for the purpose of altering the actual image.