Sketchbooks: Designer Focus
Michael Bierut
How to think with your hands
Notebooks are great because they allow designers to do what they do best—think visually. Hand-drawing and sketching is becoming a lost discipline as designers turn too fast to technology to foster their own ideation. The notebook is the place to quickly capture seeds of ideas before they get lost in the noise. And overtime, our notes and doodles yield insights into the way we think, organize our world, and respond to others—insights that we can learn from…
Sometimes the best ideas are done when you are at the starting point, the floodgates when ideas are pouring out and you worry about nothing. It allows you to think freely, open your mind to anything and, it is one of the most inspiring parts of the process
One designer in particular, Michael Bierut is a brilliant example of the power of keeping a sketchbook
“On August 12, 1982, I took a 10 x 7 1/8 inch National Blank Book Company composition book from the supply closet of my then employer, Vignelli Associates. From that moment, I have never been without one. I always have one at my desk. I take one with me to every meeting. I am now in the middle of Notebook #85. It's in front of me right now. Together, these well-worn books create a  history of my working life that spans three decades”
Michael Bierut
Minnesota Children’s Museum
Sketchbooks are great for working through mistakes and successes and for capturing the clichés and original thinking.
Example in point: Bierut’s identity process for the Minnesota Children's Museum. Cliches like crayon markings, bright primary colors, building blocks, balloons and smiley faces were thrashed out.
“Sometimes avoiding the obvious means embracing it—and wrestling it to the ground. Children’s hands, with their invitation to touch and their inherent sense of scale, provided the key. Instead of trying to draw them (silhouettes? crayon scribbles?) we recruited local kids to serve as hand models and photographed them pointing, counting, playing”
As a result, children’s hands point the way throughout the building, providing a sense of scale and, in the case of the bathroom signs, a bit of wit.
“We were lucky that the building had five floors rather than six after having decided on hands as a motif”
Michael Bierut
Image source: www.slate.com
Sketches for the identity for the Brooklyn Academy of Music (BAM), above, most of which feature chopped-off sans serif typography using News Gothic typeface, blown up to big scale, and cropped in various creative ways, right.
Image source: It’s Nice That and BAM blog
I’m With Her: The Hillary Clinton identity
How do you make a universally known candidate seem fresh and compelling?
“What looked like an H was really a window, capable of endless transformations. I wanted something that you didn’t need a software tutorial to create, something as simple as a peace sign or a smiley face. I wanted a logo that a five-year-old could make with construction paper and kindergarten scissors”
Michael Bierut
Image source: www.designobserver.com
Image source: www.dezeen.com
	
Image source: www.dezeen.com