While a passion for design is a valuable asset for a graphic designer to possess, without the skills to support that passion, entering the professional field of graphics is virtually impossible.
Fig 1. Unsplash (n.d.) Passion should be supported by relevant skills
In order to succeed in the field, graphic designers require a range of skills including artistic, technical, and communication abilities. In this article these skills are categorised as ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ skills. Here's a list of some of the essential skills a graphic designer will need in order to compete in the industry:
Hard skills
Fig 2. Unsplash (n.d.) Hard skills include technical skills, like sketching and illustration
Hard skills are tangible, measurable, and teachable and are vital for every graphic designer to master. Here are the relevant hard skills for graphic design:
Visual Communication: You must be skilled in conveying complex ideas and messages through the use of visual elements, such as typography, colour, and imagery.
Colour Theory: Sound knowledge of colour theory is key, including colour psychology, colour harmonies, colour accessibility, and the ability to combine colour schemes effectively. You will also need to be aware of cultural differences in colour association.
Typography: You need a good understanding of fonts/typefaces, and how to use text effectively in a graphic design in order to create readable, legible and aesthetically pleasing designs.
Layout and Composition: You must develop skills in arranging visual elements on a page or screen to create a balanced and aesthetically engaging design.
CAD software: Proficiency in graphic design software is vital to starting your own business or landing a job as a graphic designer. You will need the skills and experience using software such as Adobe Creative Suite (e.g. Adobe Photoshop, Illustrator, etc.), which are industry-standard tools.
Branding: Knowledge of branding principles to maintain visual consistency across all materials for a brand or business can be the difference between success or failure.
Marketing: Knowledge and an understanding of marketing concepts and how graphic design can support marketing goals will be of great benefit to you and to the company you may work for. Effective collaboration with marketing professionals will allow you to work through a marketing project much more efficiently and effectively.
Portfolio Development: You must be able to curate a strong portfolio that displays a range of design work. This is your calling card to earn employment and to showcase your skills and talent.
Ethical Considerations: Understanding ethical and legal issues related to graphic design such as copyright and intellectual property, is an essential part of working in the industry.
Hard skills relevant to a specific specialism:
Digital Illustration: If you want to specialise in digital illustration, you will need to be able to create original illustrations and vector graphics using software like Adobe Illustrator or similar tools, i.e. you need good drawing skills.
Image Editing: If a role in editing is your aim, you need to know how to edit and retouch photos to enhance their visual appeal and relate to a particular project.
User Interface (UI) Design: This specialism requires knowledge of UI principles for designing user-friendly and visually appealing digital interfaces.
Web Design: If you want to be a web designer, you need to know web design principles and how to apply them, including responsive design, HTML, CSS, as well as an understanding of user experience (UX) design.
Motion Graphics: The ability to create animations and motion graphics, often using software like Adobe After Effects, is vital if you want to have a career in motion graphics.
Print Design: If you work on projects that require printed media, you will need to be proficient in creating and setting up designs specifically for print, such as brochures, flyers, posters, and packaging.
Soft skills
Fig 3. Pexels (n.d.) Teamwork is essential in graphic design
Soft skills are more interpersonal and behavioural and while they are not specific to graphic design, they are of immeasurable benefit in the professional realm. Soft skills are often innate in certain personality types and can be quite difficult for certain people to learn. But not impossible.   
Creativity: In order to come up with original, unique, and visually appealing design concepts, graphic designers need a high degree of creativity with easy access to their imagination.
Communication Skills: As it is crucial for a graphic designer to understand a client’s needs, present design concepts, and to collaborate with team members, good communication skills, both verbal and non-verbal, are imperative.  
Teamwork: Working with other designers can be a large part of a project so it is essential that you can manage different perspectives, opinions, skills, and experiences, and work together with others to create innovative and effective solutions.
Time Management: If you are going to meet client expectations and project requirements, you will need to be able to manage multiple projects and deadlines efficiently.
Problem-Solving: Graphic designers often encounter design challenges and must find creative solutions to visual problems.
Attention to Detail: The ability to notice/identify and correct small errors in design, typography, and layout is vital to produce highly professional and well-executed outcomes.
Adaptability: Working in a constantly evolving industry like graphic design requires a willingness to adapt to new trends, tools, and technologies. A designer must remain relevant, current and continue to offer clients innovative designs. 