The term "metering" refers to the camera's ability to determine the correct aperture value and shutter speed based on the level of light that enters the lens of a camera and the ISO. Before the 1930s, cameras did not come equipped with a light metre. They thus had no built-in sensor that measured the amount and intensity of light. Today, every Digital Single-Lens Reflex (DSLR) camera has a light metre embedded into the device that automatically calculates the amount of light to determine the setting for optimal exposure. The most common metering modes in digital cameras today are:
Evaluative metering (Canon), also known as matrix metering (Nikon) 
Centre-weighted metering
Spot metering
Evaluative metering
Evaluative metering or Matrix metering is the most commonly used automatic metering mode in everyday photography. You can apply this camera mode to almost all shooting scenarios, including capturing backlit subjects. As its name suggests, evaluative metering takes a series of readings -  the brightness of the general scene, the front and rear lighting conditions, and the camera's orientation - in areas that cover the entire frame. It will then calculate and set the exposure value based on the acquired information.
Fig 1. Evaluative metering averages the exposure across large sections of the scene
Centre-weighted metering
Centre-weighted metering is the oldest and most traditional form of in-camera metering mode. This mode emphasises the middle section of your image as you view it through the lens. Therefore, it assesses the light in the middle of the frame and its surroundings but ignores the corners because it assumes that the main subject is located somewhere in the middle of the frame. This function makes centre-weighted metering a very effective mode for capturing portraits. Compared to evaluative metering, centre-weighted metering doesn't change position when changing focus points, giving you an inaccurate reading when the subject is not the centre.
Fig 2. Centre-weighted metering focuses on the centre of the image
This mode is also best used for scenes where you need more control over the specific area where the camera measures the exposure. For example, when you don't want background lighting to affect your exposure.
Spot metering
Spot metering evaluates the light around your focus point and ignores everything else. It also calculates the appropriate exposure by only measuring a small area or single zone/cell (1%-5% of the entire scene). Spot metering is advantageous in tricky lighting situations such as high contrast scenes or when the subject is backlit. It's also helpful when the subject is much darker or brighter than the rest of the frame. For example, spot metering is often used by photographers taking photos of someone speaking on a podium in a church or at a business conference. The background may be very dark, but a directional light lights their face.
Fig 3. Spot metering focuses on a small area in the centre of the image