Completing a design is only half the battle. More often than not, you will be expected to deliver a professional presentation of the design to a client, stakeholder or even colleagues. 
Consider the ’who, what, where, and how’
Design presentations will vary but the key is to first identify the following: 
Delivery platform (online or in-person)
Purpose of the presentation (to inform, pitch ideas, share final designs, etc.) 
Specific audience (e.g. clients, stakeholders, or colleagues)
Identifying these areas will help you to make appropriate decisions on how to create the presentation, especially with regard to format, length and elements to include, etc. For example, if you need to deliver a graphic design concept to a client, the presentation will need to include the project brief details and the final 2D mockups or 3D models, at a minimum. If instead, the designs are to be delivered to prominent stakeholders in a big organisation, they will be more interested in the quantifiable figures and information that accompanies the designs. There may also be a case where you wish to create a presentation that showcases your portfolio in an interview? This will mean adding development work to show your technical skills. Perhaps you will be required to present a plan to a room full of colleagues who need to be brought up to speed on a particular project? This will require a presentation with more project management content rather than visuals. 
Fig 1. Unsplash (n.d.) The nature of your presentation will inform its design
Whatever the purpose, it is essential to create design presentations that are both professional and engaging.
What medium should you use to create your presentation?
While physical design sketches, models, and portfolios were once very effective, this form of presenting a concept is no longer the go-to approach. Instead, there is an array of digital presentation software that you should consider which will allow you to present designs with more ease, flexibility, and professional flair. Even if you are, for example, delivering a design concept for print media, a tangible design prototype should still accompany a digital presentation. 
Fig 2. Pexels (n.d.) Digital presentations are the most common form of sharing designs with others
Choosing software to create your design presentation is generally a personal choice, largely depending on the following: 
App features like animation and effects
Selection of available templates and themes
Ease of use
Collaboration tools
Supported file types (pdf, .xps, .mp4, .wmv, .jpg, .png, .gif, etc.)
Fig 3. Unsplash (n.d.) Software like Slidebean has various templates to choose from
But sometimes it simply comes down to the software your employer insists upon, or what you can afford. Here are some failsafe options:
PowerPoint
Slides
Prezi
Keynote
Visme
Canva  
What should you include in a presentation?
What you include in your presentation will depend on the project's scope and the design brief's specifications. In general, the standard delivery of a graphic design for a client, should include the following:
Cover slide: Typically includes your own business or employer details (e.g. company name and logo, social media links, etc.)
Contents page: Lists the information contained in your presentation
Introduction: Briefly describes the project and client requirements
Overview:  Summarises your design process, from initial brief analysis and research to ideation, testing, and concept refinement
Final design: The final graphic design, rendered as 2D visuals (e.g. logo, poster, user interface, shop signage, etc.) or as 3D models (e.g. packaging design).
Final statement: Justifies the design by briefly explaining how it satisfies the brief
A resource slide: if applicable
Note: the above are examples of the most common information included in a graphic design presentation. You must look at each project's specific requirements and outcomes and have all of the information the client will need to see.
Also, remember that the presentation's primary focus should be to introduce all vital design elements to the client with clarity and in a logical order. Refer to the design brief and ensure that all outcomes are addressed for the client in the presentation.
Fig 4. Different slides should follow a specific style to ensure a cohesive presentation
Tips for creating a good design presentation
Ideally, the main body of the presentation should have a strong visual focus that gives the client a clear project overview. This can be combined with smaller amounts of text.
Do's and don'ts
Do consider your client’s brand identity when deciding on an appropriate presentation style (e.g. fonts, colour, icons, background, etc.)
Do consider the essential information points to be covered
Do present the information logically. Think of it as telling a story and ensure you bring the audience along with you
Do introduce engaging and relevant visuals with each new screen or slide
Do accompany these with text pertinent to your audience
Do keep text to a minimum and condense information to short points and sentences
Do use bullet points, graphs, diagrams, and timelines
Do balance the distribution of information evenly throughout the presentation to set up a rhythm and keep the audience's attention. For example, if using a slide presentation, each slide should convey approximately the same amount of information
Do finish on a strong visual that you feel captures the essence of the design project proposal. This is particularly important in a live presentation setting where it may remain on screen during a questions and answers session
Don't introduce subject matter or ideas outside the scope of the design brief
Don't repeat visual content (if possible)
If you feel that the audience or client will need access to say legal or project management documentation that is not included in the presentation, the following options work well: 
If you are sending it via email, add the documents as an appendix to the presentation 
In a live presentation setting, print hard copies to distribute but ensure you do so at the end of the presentation. The goal is to prevent them from stealing focus from the main topics of your presentation