Introduction
Whether you are a novice or highly experienced professional, networking and building relationships are beneficial skills in any industry. If you work in the design industry, these skills can have an even greater influence on your success. To ensure a project comes to fruition graphic designers need to not only connect with a client, but they must collaborate with a variety of individuals and teams including other designers, vendors, and suppliers. 
Fig 1. Unsplash (n.d.) Design collaboration can be the key to a project’s success
Design collaboration can take place online or in-person, with each format offering unique benefits and challenges. For example, online collaboration offers remote accessibility, schedule flexibility, easy resource sharing, and cost savings on things like travel and infrastructure. Nowadays, most graphic designers collaborate online. However, there are still designers who prefer in-person collaboration, since it offers a more personal face-to-face interaction, immediate feedback, more creative brainstorming as well as more focused and engaged work sessions.
Regardless of the format in which you collaborate, the specific people you end up working with can vary depending on the nature of the project or organisation, but here are some common stakeholders and collaborators.
Clients 
The most important part of a graphic designer’s business is the relationship they have with the client(s). The client is a designer’s sole financial resource and is ultimately central to everything they eventually do in their business. Graphic designers typically have to work closely with clients to understand their goals, preferences, and requirements for a project. Clients also provide input at key stages of the design process, i.e. defining the initial brief and giving crucial feedback on prototypes and final designs.
Fig 2. Unsplash (n.d.) Working with a client
Art /Creative Directors
In larger graphic design agencies or studios, designers often work under the guidance of art directors or creative directors. Based on project goals and client input, these directors establish the project's overall concept, mood, and style. Since it is their vision or their interpretation of the client's vision, art/creative directors will work alongside graphic designers during the ideation phase and act as a guide through the subsequent stages of design testing and refinement.
Copywriters
Copywriters focus on creating written content, including headlines, taglines, body copy, and scripts. Graphic designers create the visual elements, such as layouts, images, typography, and graphics. They will both work together to consolidate these elements.
So, in projects that involve any written content, graphic designers will generally need to collaborate with copywriters who will create the text and messaging that will be integrated into a design. If the aim is to achieve visual and typographic harmony within a design, effective collaboration between designers and copywriters is crucial.
Fig 3. Unsplash (n.d.) Working with copywriters
Advertising Agencies
An advertising agency works on behalf of a client to promote their brands, products, and/or services to various audiences. Graphic designers often work closely with marketing and branding teams and with advertising agencies to ensure that the design aligns with the organisation's branding guidelines and marketing strategy. Professionals in advertising agencies create promotional concepts and design advertisements for different media platforms, like the internet, television, radio, and print. Graphic designers may therefore find themselves working with advertising agencies to support the creation of these promotional products.
Illustrators and Photographers
Graphic designers in general, tend to have some experience or background in either visual art or photography. However, they may not have skills that are refined enough to generate high quality imagery required for a project. This is where professional illustrators and photographers come in. They work on the clarification of concepts or the enhancement of particular writing through visual representations. Graphic designers often need to work alongside illustrators and photographers for a number of reasons including branding, to create visuals or custom graphics to match a particular graphic design concept. 
Fig 4. Pexels (n.d.) Working with photographers
Project/Asset Managers
Project managers (sometimes classed as asset managers) will coordinate the various aspects of a project including timelines, budgets, and communication among team members. They ensure that the project stays on track and is successfully completed. Depending on the project, graphic designers can be part of a bigger design team that is managed by a team leader or project manager. This person(s) may not necessarily provide input into the creative aspects of the project, but they will work closely with a graphic designer laying down deadlines, overseeing the budget, scheduling and facilitating meetings etc.  
Web Developers
There are many different elements of website design that include significant contributions from graphic designers. These include logo design, information architecture, accessibility, navigation design, flash animation, and advertising. Together, web developers and graphic designers can generate concepts and ideas to attract or hook the right customers to a site, and ensure that a visual design is translated accurately into a functional website.  Moreover, graphic designers develop an exceptional layout before presenting it to the Website designer who uses it for the website’s functionality.
Fig 5. Pexels (n.d) Working with web designers
Legal and Compliance Teams
In industries with strict regulations such as healthcare or financial organisations, graphic designers may need to collaborate with legal and compliance teams to ensure that the design materials meet all legal and industry-specific requirements. Effective communication and collaboration with these individuals and teams is essential for graphic designers to deliver successful and impactful design projects.
Printers and Production Teams
For print projects, graphic designers work with printers and production teams to ensure that the final product is accurately produced. They may need to specify printing techniques, colours, paper types, and other production-related details. It is therefore essential that graphic designers build strong professional relationships with printers and publishers so that each party has a clear understanding of the work that is to be delivered.
Fig 6. Pexels (n.d.) Large-scale printing
Presenting with others
Creative presentations are often executed in teams. There are several things you will have to be mindful of if you are part of a team and about to present to a client. It can differ greatly from presenting alone. One of the biggest challenges for creative design teams is to create and deliver a presentation that comes across as authentic and cohesive, given that multiple people may have been involved in its conception. Here are a few tips to get the most out of a collaborative project and presentation:
Plan as a team: A presentation content & delivery plan should be developed together so that each person is on board with the approach.
Assign roles: Ensure each team member has a clearly defined role. 
Be collaborative, not competitive: Support, don’t undermine each other. You can expand on something a team member has said but don’t simply repeat it as this undermines their input.
Rehearse in advance: Every team should rehearse their presentation before the actual day and every member should be present.
For unrehearsed parts such as a Q&A: If one person is being favoured for questions they can redirect to help involve the whole team e.g. ‘John, what do you think about that?’
Reference:
Graphic Designer’s Professional Connections: Research paper (2020). https://ivypanda.com/essays/graphic-designers-professional-connections/