Design History
DUBLIN INSTITUTE OF DESIGN
Avant Garde
Paradigm Shift
Artists and particularly designers in the early 20th century moved away from the more traditional forms of art and design and sought to embrace new modes of thinking, creating and living. The emphasis was on the following:
Embracing modernist values & ideas
The rejection of representational art (purely aesthetic pleasure - that seeks only to please the eye).
Revision and recreation: Reconfigure, rehash, rewrite, cut up and remodel to create something new
The creation of a new original visual language
Picasso & Braque Collages
Picasso was the most influential artist in the first half of the 20th century. He is considered a pioneer of collage and deconstruction of perspective along with Braque. In 1907 Pablo Picasso’s unveiled his radical Les Demoiselles d’Avignon painting, this marked a turn from traditional composition and perspective in painting. This figurative painting is composed of flat, fractured planes and faces inspired by African masks. The shapes are splintered and sharp and the perspective seeks to show all sides at once. Picasso also experimented with different mediums such as paper, card, string to create 3D work to express his ideas.
Georg Braque’s guitar collage across demonstrates the flat blocks of colour used and angular planes.
Above: Braque collage
De Stijl
De Stijl
De Stijl (or The Style) was a related movement in the Netherlands. Theo van Doesburg, an architect & Piet Mondrian formed the group and founded a publication called de Stijl which presented their ideas and aesthetics.
After World War I there was a turning away from old forms and philosophies among architects and designers, just as there was among artists and writers.
Many of the same ideas came into play, as did ideas that incorporated the "machine" aesthetics of the new industrial age.
All design was ordered by rules of design economy and simplicity.
The philosophy was based on functionalism, with a severe doctrine.
De Stijl artists sought to create a universal style in painting, architecture and design, using rectangles and squares in geometric shapes of primary colors with black, grey and white, all carefully arranged in a grid format.
All surface decoration except color was to be eliminated, and only pure primary hues, plus black, grey and white were to be allowed.
Mondrian
Piet Mondrian was one of the founding members of De Stijl (The Style) in the Netherlands. His simplification and abstraction of elements in his paintings were an effort to create order and clarity in the visual world and led the way to the creation of a universal aesthetic language within his work. His artistic style went from traditional representation to complete abstraction.
Palettes and forms were reduced to create harmony and balance leading to a very particular visual aesthetic.
'Composition 6, 1914' by Piet Mondrian
Piet Mondrian, Composition with Yellow, Blue, and Red, 1937-42
Theo Van Duesburg
Dutch artist Van Doesburg (1883-1931) was another founding member of De Stijl movement in the Netherlands.
Inspired by Wassily Kandinsky and Mondrian he turned his attention to creating abstract work from a more spiritual plane than visual representation.
The Construction of Space - Time III	Van Doesburg ”De Stijl” Cover 1917
Dada: Cut Up Methods
Cut Ups, Collages & Photomontages
The explosion of photographic images in the mass media in the interwar years stimulated artists’ experimentation with montage, collage, and other dynamic modes of picture construction.
Collage: Collage is to create an images from a number of other torn or cut up newspapers, images or materials etc. “Coller” means glue in French.
Photomontage: Is a collage made mostly from photographs or printed images.
Collage by Kurt Schwitters 1940 Berlin	Photomontage by Herbert Bayer (1932)
Avant Garde & Dada
Dada was an art movement that sprang up during 1915-16 World War 1 as a rejection of war and capitalist values in Europe and the America. This anti-bourgeois, anti-art movement expressed their radical views through creating art through cuts ups (collage), cutting sound clips, reorganising and relabeling work.
Marcel Duchamp -Mona Lisa with Mustache
Marcel Duchamp “Tonsure”
Kurt Schwitters
Schwitters is famous for his collages and is often seen as the father of collage. He met with Dutch artist Theo Van Doesburg and embarked on trip around the Netherlands in a bid to spread the word about Dada.
Collage by Kurt Schwitters
Above: Schwitters & Van Doesburg’s 1922 poster for a Dada Soiree in the Netherlands. www.moma.org
Raoul Hausmann
Hausmann, an Austrian, was a founding member of the Dada in Berlin. He was a pioneer of photomontage and used it as a satirical tool for political protest. His visual juxtaposition of photos, found objects and type made for striking compositions.
Raoul Hausmann & Hannah Hoch (1920)	Cino by Hausmann
Hannah Hoch
Hoch (1889 –1978) was a German Dada artist and one of the pioneers of photomontage. (Collage made with photos.) She studied glass design and the graphic arts but became interested in Dada when she met Raoul Hausmann.
Dada art was labelled “degenerate” work by the Nazi party. In this regard, Hannah’s work from the Weimar days are her most famous due to the fact that she had to keep a low profile and work conspicuously at the time of the Third Reich. She was active in creating work with themes on gender, politics and androgyny.
Left: Untitled (1930)
Above: Dada Montage by Hoch
John Heartfield
Photomontage
Various methods can be used to combine two or more photographs into a single image - several negatives (combination printing) or multiple exposures. The term photomontage came from the German Dada at the end of WWI, most notably from the work of German expatriate, John Heartfield, (1891-1968).
Heartfield cut and pasted together parts of different photographs to recreate a new composition, often satirizing Hitler and the Nazi Party. The text was often quotes from leading Nazis. In the case of the image on the right the title states “The Meaning of the Hitler Salute: - Little Man Asks for Big Gifts” (1932). Heartfield had strong beliefs in the power of images, images that could shape a society.
In 1931 his work was exhibited in Berlin, along with 45 other artists, as part of the first public exhibition of photomontage.
Photo-epigram series by Heartfield (Verso Books): Left Title: Whoever Reads Bourgeois Newspapers Becomes Blind and Deaf: Away with These Stultifying Bandages!
	
Photomontage by Heartfield “The Meaning of Geneva”	Photomontage by Heartfield
Russian Constructivism
Russian Avant-Garde
Russian Constructivism
Constructivism had its start in 1913 in Russia by a group of artists and architects influenced by cubism.
Constructivism describes a trend in the fields of painting, sculpture and kinetics which closely conjoined artists and their art with machine production, architecture and the applied arts.
In 1920, the movement wrote their “Realist Manifesto” that outlined the goals of the movement (one of which was to “construct art” - hence the name, constructivist).
In this manifesto, the group declared their enthusiasm for machines, technology, industrialism and modern industrial materials. Although they considered themselves artists, they sought to emulate the practical thinking of mechanical engineering.
The artists did not believe in abstract ideas, rather they tried to link
art with concrete and tangible ideas.	Gustav Klutsis’s Constructivist Poster “Let us fulfill the plan of the great project (1930).
Russian Constructivism
Politically engaged artists considered it their duty to build a better way of life. Applying their artistic skills to industrial production, they developed "new things for the new life.”
Stylistically Constructivism is marked by:
organization of abstract, geometrical elements to make dynamic or visually stable forms
combinations of different sans serif typefaces for their visual and formal properties as well as their literal meanings
flat, symbolic colours
white space as part of the design
photography & photomontage (as opposed to illustrations)
Lissitzky’s diagrammatic 1919 image, Beat The Whites With The Red Wedge, representing (two years after the fact) the (red) Bolsheviks driving out the (white) imperial regime.
El Lissitzky
El Lissitzky (1890-1941) was perhaps one of the most innovative artists among the constructivists. He worked across different types of media including painting, graphic design, photography and architecture. His experiments with composition and visual ideas around balance, space, and form transferred across to his his graphic design and architecture.
His poster for the Russian Exhibition in Zurich in 1929 (across) features a freakish double head but his has a purpose, to emphasize the egalitarian status of women and men in the new Communist society. His photomontage style featured startling juxtapositions of real objects with naturalistic and abstract forms.
While his early avant-garde work greatly influenced European designers, his later career was spent producing Stalinist propaganda.
FIRST EDITION. "ONE OF THE MAJOR BOOKS DESIGNED BY EL LISSITZKY... the pace and rhythm of his
layouts show both a cinematic influence and a master graphic designer at work". The Photobook, vo. I, p.155; The Russian Avant-Garde Book 996.
https://www.christies.com/lotfinder/Lot/el-lissitzky-5054145-details.aspx
	
El Lissitzky’s Experimental Typesetting & Typography
Aleksander Rodchenko
Aleksander Rodchenko (1891-1956) was another very influential Russian Constructivist artist and graphic designer. He believed in the introduction of art into every day life. Like El Lissitzky, he worked across different types of media from painting and sculpture to photography and montage, which he used in his graphic design work. After 1921 he abandoned painting altogether, considering it too limited for his work.
He created design for a number of different types of clients such as the Russian airline Dobrolet (image across top right) but also included worked for other clients producing book covers, magazines, posters (across bottom right), ceramics, textiles, furniture, photo-montage and illustration, film titles, set & costume design for various Russian theaters and even an aircraft hangar.
Rodchenko's work influenced so many of the designers of the early 20th century that it is impossible to catalog the vast reaches of the idealogy that he helped define during his career.
	
A famous Rodchenko photomontage of 1924 for a Moscow publisher in which Lilya Brik, the muse of the poet Vladimir Mayakovsky, joyously cries out 'books’!
Alexander Rodchenko, Photomontage for Vladimir Mayakovsky's “Conversations with a Tax Collector About Poetry” 1926
	
His techniques included superimposing images, extreme close-ups, and rhythmically repeating an image.
Aleksandr Rodchenko (Orator. Verse) 1929 - MoMA
Varvara Stepanova
Varvara Stepanova (1894-1958) was a Russian avant-garde painter, photographer and designer. Dedicating a large part of her working life to affecting social change, she created posters, set design, costume and books. While her work sometimes reflects a Cubists and the Futurist influence she dedicated her working life to creating change within society.
Her work, along with the work of the rest of the Russian avant-garde and Constructivist artists, helped pave the way for all modern day graphic designers as they created art with a purpose in hopes of bettering the society in which they lived.
Across Top: The Results of the First Five-Year Plan 1932 Bottom left: Design for sportswear 1924
Bottom Right: Varvara Stepanova pattern for textiles
Gustav Klutsis
Latvian born Gustav Klutsis (1895-1938) was an art teacher, photographer and graphic artist in the early 20th century. He is considered one of the pioneers of photomontage. His collaborative work with wife Valentina saw the creation of many political posters for the Soviet revolution and for Josef Stalin. He was detained while leaving for the New York World Fair in 1938 and executed shortly after.
Top Left: ‘Design for Loudspeaker No. 5’, 1922
Bottom Left: The Development of Transportation 1929 Across Right: Lithograph on Paper (1924)
Valentina Kulagina
Valentina Kulagina-Klutsis (1902-1987) attended VKhUTEMAS art school where she met her art teacher and future husband/design collaborator Gustav Klutsis. Following graduation she worked as a designer in mainly exhibition  and poster design. Her design work uses a mixture of techniques from lithography, photomontage, typography and painting.
Across Left: For Defense of the USSR (1930)
Across Right: International Working Women’s Day (1930)
Stenberg Brothers -1928
In the turbulent politics of Russia in 1919, the fine arts were rejected as part of a change in political ideology. In the new Communist society art was put to work in the service of the state.
Two artistic mediums, movies and posters, were exploited by the state as the perfect platforms to educate the illiterate masses. Stylistically artists became constructors, assembling images into new compositions and collages.
Two brothers, Vladimir and Georgii Stenberg, created a series of dramatic posters for the Russian cinema.
Mechanical enlargement was not yet available, so they developed a special hand technique to increase images to poster size.
They combined contrasting scale and unusual color application to create dramatic, theatrical impact.
	
Above and Across: Examples of Stenberg brothers posters
China 1940-60s
The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) took inspiration in the 1940s-60s from Russian political art and propaganda. In the images across you can see this influence in terms of colour, graphic style and theme (the rise of the proletariot (worker) classes and the cult of personality).
	
Above and Across: Chinese Cultural Revolution Posters
Contemporary
Jim Fitzpatrick’s “Viva Che”
Irish Artist Jim Fitzpatrick is mostly known for his Celtic Illustrations and Thin Lizzy artwork. However, it was his 1968 iconic work ”Viva Che” that brought him International attention.
“I created this image after Che Guevara’s murder to promote freedom against oppression and it did the job pretty well I think. The need for such symbols never ended and now the need is once again great! I hope this image of Che Guevara can inspire another generation to resist oppression.”
Shepard Fairey
Shepard Fairey (b. 1970) is an American graphic designer, illustrator, Street artist and activist. He graduated with a BFA in Illustration from Rhode Island School of Design. While in college he created a sticker campaign which subsequently led to his Obey Giant campaign which gained widespread success. He founded Alternate Graphics in 1990 then BLK/MRKT and later his own design studio with his wife before moving to Project 2050 as Creative Director in 2006.
Shepard is known for his Obama Hope poster and Obey Campaign.
Across Left: Fairey’s Obey - Consume - Repeat Poster
Below: Fairey’s Ad for Saks Fifth Avenue (2009)
Striking similarity in graphic style to Russian Constructivist Propaganda
Sources
Sources Consulted
http://www.historygraphicdesign.com/ http://www.designhistory.org/ http://www.designishistory.com/ https://visualartsdepartment.wordpress.com
Guggenheim: https://www.guggenheim.org/artwork/artist/
MoMA: https://www.moma.org/research-and-learning/archives/
Smithsonian American Art Museum: https://americanart.si.edu/artist/
Christies: https://www.christies.com/lotfinder/Lot/el-lissitzky-5054145-details.aspx
Jim Fitzpatrick: https://www.jimfitzpatrick.com/
Shepard Fairey: https://obeygiant.com/