Graphic design serves many roles in society, including:
Providing information
Promoting products and services
Identifying brands
Enhancing user experiences
Entertaining
Social causes and political campaigning
Provide information
Knowledge is power.
Graphic designers use a combination of imagery, text, and layout principles to create designs that communicate a specific message to an audience. Powerful graphic design guides the viewer’s attention towards the essential information. It is not simply about presenting text in an aesthetically pleasing way. It is about using a full range of elements and principles to:
communicate ideas, 
share essential information,
evoke emotions, 
make good first impressions, 
tell a story about a brand
and instil trust. 
Fig 1. Pixabay (n.d.) Departure and arrival information at an airport
Consider the packaging of most food products on a supermarket shelf.  It needs to communicate the type of product inside, the ingredients and nutritional value, the volume or weight, and it must give some sort of description of the product. This is the type of information a consumer needs in order to make a purchase decision. 
Fig 2. Visualhunt (n.d.) Food packaging
Beyond the essentials, graphic design must also guide the viewer towards the information that will influence their purchase decision. It can be the difference between a consumer choosing one product over another. 
For example, the next time you are in the supermarket, look at different types of orange juice on sale. What does the different packaging look like, and what does it tell you? Is the juice fresh or from concentrate? Is it a budget product or a luxury item? Is it suitable to drink in the morning, all day or after sports? Is it popular with children or aimed at adults? Then consider how the packaging gives you this information through: 
text,
layout,
colour,
typeface,
image,
texture,
or any other element or principle. 
Graphic design can also use symbols to communicate helpful information, for example: 
The instruction manual that comes with an electrical appliance 
The ladies vs gents signs at a public toilet
Indicating that a particular brand made an item of clothing
Safety or other care symbols in public spaces 
Fig 3. Pixabay (n.d.) Road signs
The primary function of graphic design is to ensure that the information provided is accurate, does not mislead the audience and guides the viewer towards essential details. This will aid the viewers in making informed decisions, using products correctly,  identifying brands, and navigating new surroundings. In extreme circumstances, getting the correct information at the right time can even save a life.  
Promote a service or product
Companies rely on graphic designers to market their brands, products, and services to generate new business and maintain clientele. Good design uses elements and principles of design to capture an audience’s attention and clearly and effectively communicate a company’s identity through its products and services. 
Fig 4. Pixabay (n.d.) CAT advertisement
These designs can include both text and visuals, and they can contain a representation of the actual product or service. Some of the best designs are incredibly simple yet powerful, using a single phrase or image. 
Take for example, the graphics and branding that Apple uses to market their latest products. The iconic apple logo features on the product, of course, but also on their website, stores, and packaging. Apple is known for sleek minimalist design in their products, which continues to the graphic design they use to market their devices. 
Fig 5. Unsplash (n.d.) Apple products
Consistency with the use of colour, typeface, line and layout across the entire brand delivers a message to the viewer of high quality, efficiency, reliability and ease of use. The web design highlights the phone's key new features, for example, making it easy for the consumer to identify what they value and make a purchase decision. 
Fig 6. Pixabay (n.d.) Coca-Cola branded public chairs
Simply put, good graphic design allows consumers to immediately recognise, understand, or be interested in what a brand is and what it is trying to sell. The aim is to capture the consumers' attention and get them interested in the new product. This is not always easy, and designers need to understand human behaviour, spending habits, and what makes for visually engaging designs. 
Brand identification
In line with promoting a product or service clearly and effectively, graphic design plays a big part in allowing people to identify (and identify with) a brand. The brand is often the first thing the consumer sees on the packaging, website, email, app, etc. A strong brand will be immediately recognisable. Some world-renowned brands have become so popular and well-known that just displaying their logo on a bottle  is enough to entice potential customers. 
Graphic design gives the consumer information about what to expect. The visual language used with the brand must match both the product and the ‘personality’ of the business. For example, soft and cartoon-like images may be inappropriate for selling luxury watches by a company with a ‘sophisticated’ identity. Careful consideration of logo, colour palette, typeface and image will ensure the graphic designer creates a clear and appealing brand. 
Fig 7. Pixabay (n.d.) Ralph Lauren product
Enhance user experiences
Graphic design is not only about marketing brands, products, or services. Good graphic design allows us to go about our daily tasks in an easier, faster, more convenient or more efficient way. Take, for example, your mobile phone. A lot of consideration went into the icons and how they are displayed, the layout of the apps, the steps you have to navigate in your phone’s settings, etc. It was designed to be user-friendly and make the experience of using your phone as easy and as pleasurable as possible.
Fig 8. Pixabay (n.d.) Example of a mobile phone interface
Reading a magazine, menu, or subway train map, following a recipe step-by-step through photographs or playing a board game are other examples where the user experience is influenced by good design. Even your TV's remote control design requires considerable thinking and consideration from a designer!
Fig 9. Pixabay (n.d.) Board game design
Good graphic design significantly enhances the user’s experience, whether with a product or service or while going about their daily routine. 
Entertainment
Sometimes, graphic design can be purely inspirational or entertaining. Yes, this role of graphic design has a hand in the success of marketing a product, like console games promoting the Playstation or Nintendo. But, as a standalone, entertaining its user is the main priority.
Fig 10. Pixabay (n.d.) Pokemon online game
Graphic design plays a pivotal role in entertainment through gaming, clothing, phone cover designs, virtual meeting backgrounds, and more. It can even be as simple as the illustration on a birthday card. In short, graphic design has value in and of itself by inspiring and entertaining the viewer with aesthetically pleasing designs. 
Fig 11. Pixabay (n.d.) New Year’s wishes card
Social Causes and Political Campaigning
Now that you have started developing your skills in graphic design, be sure to apply your skills honestly and ethically. Graphic designers are often employed to create infographics, posters, websites and other items that support a particular social cause or campaign for politicians or political movements.
For example, in WW1 and WW2, many posters were designed to encourage young men to enlist in the army. Graphic designs of that time also addressed women, trying to get them to ration food portions or show their support for the troops in various ways. More recently, this can be seen in the design of demonstration posters, advertisements, or social media banners and profile badges that call for support for a range of social and political movements such as Black Lives Matter, Ukraine war aid, Women Against Violence, etc.  
Fig 12. Pixabay (n.d.) Surveillance awareness poster
A word of caution. Propaganda is a form of social and political communication that aims to influence people with biased or misleading information. It can be used to promote a cause or a point of view. Its purpose should be distinct from communications aimed at using art, illustrations, text, and other visuals to communicate a message supporting a cause or a country.  The information presented might be selective, telling a story about an issue that does not represent a fair and accurate picture. Propaganda is often used to influence people into acting in ways they otherwise would not if they had more accurate information. For example, the WW1 and WW2 posters mentioned earlier could be considered propaganda since they often focused on the ‘glory’ and not the reality of war. The messages were often simplistic, and the visuals persuasive, but they did not convey to the audience more complicated truths. 
Fig 13. Pixabay (n.d.) Fake news awareness poster
As you go about your daily routine, take note of just how many different ‘forms’ of graphic design you encounter. How many ‘communications’ have you encountered in your day? 10? 20? 30?
From the moment you wake up and turn to social media, through to driving to work or getting onto public transport or even getting a coffee and ordering some takeaway food. Graphic design is all around us and is intrinsic in everything we do.
Over To You
Now it’s your turn to explore the roles of graphic design.
Question to consider: 
What is an example of a graphic design work that could fall into several different categories or roles? Research and find 2-3 such examples.
Then grab your sketchbook and break down some of the different parts used to create one of the designs. Test and sketch the colour palettes, typeface, layout etc. What works well here? How do the design choices influence the message of the design? 
When you’re done, head over to the forum and share your examples and ideas with your fellow students. 
Image reference:
Source for Figures 1, 3-13: Pixabay.com
Source for Figure 2: Visualhunt.com