A condensed History of Graphic Design - Part 3
As the 20th Century hurtled into the future, so too did innovations in Graphic Design. By the 1960’s the age of advertising was in full swing and graphic design was at the heart of it. The lines between print advertising and popular culture were never more blurred and corporations recognised the power of this level of social presence. It was a highly competitive era and corporations had an insatiable appetite for new ways to cultivate their brands and make them instantly recognisable. 
In this section you will learn about:
Swiss Style
New York School
Psychedelic Era
Digital Age
International Typographic Style (a.k.a Swiss design) - 1950’s - 1970’s
After the two world wars and the lingering influences of Bauhaus and de Stijl, the International Style, also known as the Swiss Style, would emerge from Switzerland and Germany.
The major difference between the Swiss movement and its earlier predecessors was its international outreach and its dogged persistence. It was not a manifesto that made it popular throughout America and Europe, which was by all accounts non-existent, but it was the clearly defined aesthetic that appealed to designers. It would become a dominant style in the world of graphic design for over 20 years!
The emphasis was on cleanliness, readability and objectivity. The goal was clarity. The designer must present information in a visual language that is easily readable and easily understood. 
One in a series of posters Josef Müller- Brockman . He was interested in the patterns in typography mimicking the rhythm in music.
To achieve this level of clarity, designers would first create a mathematical grid. The various elements of the design would then be placed in an asymmetrical composition in various places within the grid. It was the rigidity of the grid and the creativity of the layout that created the appealing quality of the Swiss movement. It was a harmonious tension.
The sans-serif font Akzidenz Grotesk was a popular choice at the time as it expressed the ideals of modernity without sentimentality. The text was generally aligned to the left and photography was often chosen over illustrations.
Berthold first published Akzidenz-Grotesk in 1898.
Although the work was highly structured with a sterile lack of humour or human emotion, it still maintained an optimism for the future and the youthful giddiness of the time. The designers viewed their work as a solution to a communication problem. It was a scientific approach where nuance and eccentricities were basically the antithesis of modernism.  
The 1950s was a post-war period that was embracing the notion of “better living through science”. Social order and clarity were key.
New York School 1950s
The war was over, the troops were home and the world was rebuilding. It was a time of huge corporate growth and America was working hard to keep up with the rapidly increasing pace. People wanted to return to normalcy and family homes, cars and the everyday luxuries of modern life were on everyone's most-wanted list. As the growing corporations battled it out for the public’s dollar, consumer loyalty became key. This was the birth of branding and  corporate logos. 
Paul Rand (1914 - 1996) and Saul Bass (1920- 1996) were two men who would inadvertently Americanise the Swiss movement. While they were both strongly influenced by typographic styles of their era, they were also artists and would allow their graphic work to bleed into more creative and free-style visuals. 
Paul Rand 1914 – 1996
Rand is the designer who’s contribution to graphic design resulted in corporate branding that are not only household names, but many of which are still in use and can be recognised in every corner of the earth. Brands such as IBM, ABC, Cummins Engine, Westinghouse, and UPS, among many others, owe their graphical heritage to him.
When Rand designed the infamous IBM logo in 1956, Mark Favermann noted that it “was not just an identity but a basic design philosophy that permeated corporate consciousness and public awareness” The logo was modified by Rand in 1960, and the striped logo in 1972.
Along with logo design, from the early 1970’s through to the early 1980’s Rand also designed packaging and marketing materials for IBM. This includes the well known Eye-Bee-M poster. In the 1960s Rand was hired by Ford to redesign their corporate logo, but they ultimately decided against his modernised design.
Saul Bass 1920-1996
Saul Bass was less corporate branding and more Hollywood movies, best known for his Hitchock poster designs. His manipulation of typography pioneered a previously unobtainable emotional and psychological impact. He also worked with Otto Preminger and Martin Scorsese and became known as the master of film title design.
The concept of film titles being more than just a list of names was so new, that when reels of Otto Preminger’s controversial new drugs movie, The Man with the Golden Arm was delivered to theatres in 1955, it came with a note on the reel cans  "Projectionists – pull curtain before titles".
Preminger wanted his audience to see The Man with the Golden Arm’s titles as an integral part of the film.
Saul Bass
Title Sequence:The Man with the Golden Arm (1955)
Bass also designed the opening for several Alfred Hitchcock films, including North by Northwest, Vertigo and Psycho.
His most famous poster is arguably Hitchcock’s 1958’s film Vertigo. For the opening title sequence, Bass shot an extreme close-up of a woman’s face and then closed in on her eye before spinning it into an unsettling spiral as red blood soaks the screen.
Psychedelic Era 1960-70s
As the 1950’s came to a close, so too did the social constraints of the post-war era. The 1960’s was a new kind of revolution where the youth culture was emerging for the first time and hippies and psychedelic music heralded a sense of carefree abandon. This permeated through every area of design and style including graphic design. Old typographies were considered rigid and stiff and the free flow that was originally found in Art Nouveau was re-emerging through the San Francisco flower power culture. Clarity was rejected and style was embraced. 
Cool was a currency that began in the streets and rapidly blossomed globally. 
New York’s PushPin Studios embraced the concept of irreverent, fresh design and moved it into the mainstream. It was under the direction of Milton Glaser, Edward Sorel and Seymour Chwas that PushPin combined the organic design aspects of Arts and Crafts, Art Nouveau, and Art Deco with contemporary photography, typography and illustration to create an original design entity.
The Push Pin Graphic was aThe bi-monthly publication and a product of their collaboration. Push Pins early illustration work can be identified by its a "bulgy" three-dimensional line.
Edward Sorel only remained with Push Pin until 1956, but for twenty years Glaser and Chwast steered it towards becoming a guiding reference in the world of graphic design. Today, Chwast is principal of The Pushpin Group, Inc.
PushPin was not just limited to this publication project. In 1968, Milton Glaser became one of the founders and design directors of New York magazine, creating a regional weekly with a fresh layout and format.
In 1983, Glaser founded WBMG, a firm whose speciality is the graphic remaking of publications (including the Washington Post).
The globally recognisable I“heart” NYcampaign was originally a pro-bono piece for the New York office of Tourism. Although Glaser created the I Love NY campaign, he did not copyright it. While this may be viewed as financially myopic, perhaps it would not have become such a ubiquitous presence in New York city if it had been under copyright limitations. 
As a New Yorker, Glaser has made his mark on his city including the restaurants, observation deck, and permanent exhibition for the now destroyed New York World Trade Centre. He also teaches extensively and has worked in interior and industrial design.
The Digital Era
Much of Milton Glaser’s work was carried out in the “manual era” of design where type was set on a huge machine, positioned by hand and held in place with wax strips. It was a painstaking process and involved patience and precision. 
Some Illustrations may have incorporated photographs, but they were largely hand done with material similar to what had been used for hundreds of years. It was only in more recent years that markers and coloured pencils were introduced.
What seems absurd today, was very much normal for a long time. 
Then in the late 1980’s, graphic design and the world would change forever. It was the arrival of the Apple Macintosh (or Mac) computer. Designers could now manipulate type in seconds and even add new fonts and include image manipulation. It was a complete and total revolution.  
Suddenly anyone could be a designer, and many tried. There was a fresh injection of excitement brought to the field, but the impact of the computer on graphic designers is not entirely positive.
As the cultural critic Johanna Drucker pointed out "The tools of the designer were confused with the skills of the designer. ..”
Since anyone with access to a computer could design a poster or flyer, the profession was undercut and as a result, the quality of work suffered. 
Today the mainstreaming of personal computers and desktop publishing software graphics means that designers are now taking on the roles of typesetting and pre-press production.  
They have also been pressured into a situation where, in order to keep up,  designers need to spend thousands of euros constantly updating hardware and software. This also involves continuous upgrading of skills putting them at the mercy of the industries they helped to promote!
It is, however, vital for a graphic designer to remain mindful of the fact that a computer and its software are just tools of the trade. They are incredibly useful but they will not do the job of a designer.
The graphic designer is above all a problem solver. They are the person who is responsible for visually and effectively communicating an idea.
All the artists and designers that have come before and all the work that is currently being produced, are fragments of information that will inform and inspire a designer's creative mind.  Design thinking is the act or practice of using your mind to consider design. It is seeing a solution in a different way and it is tickling the imagination of the viewer and the designer themselves. The most important thing a designer can have is not a computer or the best software or materials, it is an active mind and an eye for design.  