Types of visual representations
Earlier in this lesson, you were introduced to the purpose of communicating or presenting your work to others, either to your team or to a client. Communicating designs comes in many different forms and at various times during the design process, so it’s important to know how to best show your work to get the feedback you need to inform your design decisions. 
Fig 1. Unsplash (n.d.) Commuting designs to others
During the communication/presentation process, you will often hear terms such as “proof”, “prototype”, “mock-up”, and “visualisation”. These terms refer to different stages or types of visual representations of a design concept or final product. While these terms are sometimes used interchangeably, there are distinctions between them in relation to their purpose, level of fidelity, and the specific stage in the design process when it’s produced or presented. 
Proofs
A proof is a preliminary version of a design that is created for the purpose of review, feedback, and approval. It serves as a visual representation of the design concept and allows stakeholders to evaluate the layout, typography, colour scheme, and overall aesthetics. You would typically create a proof prior to the final production. This will allow for final confirmation and sign off. Proofs can be digital or physical representations of your design and may include digital mock-ups, printouts, or digital files that showcase the design in its intended format (e.g. website mock-ups, print proofs, etc.). Proofs generally serve as a way for designers and/or clients to identify any errors, inconsistencies, or areas for improvement before finalising the design.
Fig 2. Unsplash (n.d.) A few individual print proofs for a magazine
Mock-ups
A mock-up is a static representation of a design concept that simulates the appearance and layout of the final design product. Mock-ups can be produced as either 2D or 3D representations, and are often used in print design, packaging design, and web design to visualise how the design will look in its intended environment. Mock-ups can be digital or physical and may include detailed renderings, sketches, or digital files that showcase the design in context (e.g. a 2D brochure mock-up or a 3D packaging mock-up). They provide a realistic preview of the graphic design’s appearance, allowing clients, stakeholders, or potential users to assess its visual impact and provide you with feedback. In turn, you can then use this feedback and your own reflection to make informed decisions towards finalising the outcome.
Fig 3. Unsplash (n.d.) Mock-up of an entire magazine for testing  
Prototypes
A prototype is a functional or interactive model of a design concept. Prototypes simulate the user experience and functionality of the final product, and are mostly used in digital design, web design, and product design to test usability, navigation, and functionality. For example, an online game prototype will be a much more simplified version of the gaming concept, created purely for testing (i.e. fewer resources would be committed to it). You could then ask potential users to play the simplified version of the game, for example a short snippet or just one level, to validate your idea and identify potential problems through feedback. Prototypes can be interactive, like the example of a video game, or it can be low-fidelity wireframes or paper sketches that closely resemble the final product.
Fig 3. Unsplash (n.d.) Prototype testing can involve VR experiences
Visualisation
Visualisations refer to the process of creating any visual representations or renderings of a design concept to communicate ideas, concepts, or specifications. Visualisations can take on various forms, including initial sketches, refined renderings, illustrations, or digital drawings. You typically use visualisations throughout the design process to convey design ideas, explore different concepts, and communicate with clients, colleagues, or other stakeholders. They help bring concepts to life, stimulate creativity, and facilitate collaboration by providing a shared visual reference point.
Fig 4. Unsplash (n.d.) Initial design sketches
In summary:
Proofs are preliminary versions used for review and approval
Mock-ups visualise the appearance of the final product
Prototypes simulate functionality and user experience
Visualisations communicate design ideas and concepts
Consider the ’who, what, where, and how’
Now that you are more familiar with the different types of visual representations, the question is, which type of format to use? Since design presentations vary, it is important to first identify the following: 
Delivery platform (i.e. online or in-person), 
Purpose of the presentation (i.e. to inform, pitch ideas, share final designs, etc.) 
Specific audience (e.g. clients, stakeholders, or colleagues)
Identifying these areas will help you to make appropriate decisions on how to create the presentation, especially with regard to format, length and elements to include. For example, if you need to deliver an initial design concept to a client for a billboard poster, the presentation may only include the project brief details and some 2D visualisations (sketches) of poster ideas at a minimum. If, however, you are further along the design process in the testing phase for example, and the client requires you to design a mailer box for their products, then a 3D mockup of the box design will be appropriate. Depending on the meeting platform, this model could be presented digitally or physically.