User Testing and Evaluation
User Testing Tips
Jakob Nielsen: User Testing (Why and How) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v8JJrDvQDF4&t=1s http://www.nngroup.com/articles/which-ux-research-methods/
Instead of explaining your design, show it to people and let them try it.
Stand back and let them know that your job is to improve it and that you want their help and honest feedback.
When they point to a wireframe and say what action they would do, offer them
the next drawing so they see how the screen image changes in the flow.
Be quiet. Ask them to "imagine I am not here".
If you talk too much or help them, you aren’t learning anything new.
When someone asks “would it do X”? Don’t answer the question, but instead ask "what would you like to see?" This way you capture valuable ideas.
Usability Lab Studies: participants are brought into a lab, one-on-one with a researcher, and given a set of scenarios that lead to tasks and usage  of specific interest within a product or service.
Ethnographic Field Studies: researchers meet with and study participants
in their natural environment, where they would most likely encounter the product or service in question.
Eyetracking:  an  eyetracking  device  is  configured  to  precisely  measure
where participants	look	as	they	perform	tasks	or	interact	naturally with	websites, applications, physical products, or environments.
Usability Benchmarking: tightly scripted usability studies are performed
with several		participants,	using	precise	and	predetermined measures	of performance.
Intercept Surveys: a survey that is triggered during the use of a site or app.
A/B Testing: a method of scientifically testing different designs on a site by randomly assigning groups of users to interact with each of the different designs and measuring the effect of these assignments on user behavior.
Concept Testing: a researcher shares an approximation of a product or
service that captures the key essence (the value proposition) of a new concept or product in order to determine if it meets the needs of the target audience; it can be done one-on-one or with larger numbers of participants, and either in-person or online.
Customer Feedback: open-ended and/or close-ended information provided by
a self-selected sample of users, often through a feedback link, button, form, or email.
Clickstream Analysis: analyzing the record of screens or pages that users
clicks on and sees, as they use a site or software product.
and many more...
User Testing Sessions
Using the provided script, adapt it to your site. Come up with some goals/ steps you would like the user to accomplish to evaluate your site.
Perform at least one test; Partner up with someone and hold a session.
As a post mortem write an analyses the testing session(s). Some of the suggested content:
Transcribe the key findings from the test.
Did the test accomplish the goals you set out to find?
	Did the findings confirm the design goals based on your User Personas /Journeys?
	If you were continuing the design of the site what would you improve/ change based on findings from the test?